---
layout: post
---

<p style="font-style: italic; text-align: center;">Exploring the dynamically discursive nature of syllabi as boundary objects — the complex, often surprisingly fraught negotiations involved when one new element is introduced to traditional syllabi: the charge to bring in a collaborator from outside one's home discipline.</p>

**Authors:** [Mike Atienza](authors.html#atienza), [Gabe Malo](authors.html#malo), [elizaBeth Simpson](authors.html#simpson), [Fabian Prieto-Ñañez](authors.html#prieto), [Hong-An Wu](authors.html#wu), [Jessica Landau](authors.html#landau), [Edward Prutzer](authors.html#prutzer), [Svetlozara Stoytcheva](authors.html#stoytcheva), [Melissa Terry](authors.html#terry).

**Editors:** [Anita Say Chan](authors.html#chan), [Robin Wharton](authors.html#wharton).

Read the author bios [here](authors.html).

## Contents

[Introduction](introduction), Anita Say Chan

1. [The Unthinkable Ally: Private/Public (Sector) Engagements to Produce an Interdisciplinary Collaborative Syllabus](atienza), Mike Atienza

    Abstract: Could working with a collaborator ease and lighten the process of creating an undergraduate introductory course syllabus about digital media and society? This article is a reflection on the process of collaboration between an early stage doctoral student at a public research university and an unthinkable ally—an industry professional from an online corporation. The doctoral student made assumptions about the industry professional’s views about data extraction practices from online consumer activity. During the process of co-designing the syllabus, the personal and professional stakes of the private industry professional challenged the doctoral student’s preconceptions about the corporate perspectives on consumer data sharing. Thus, Paulo Freire’s concept of problem-posing education was applied both to the construction of the syllabus and to the collaborative relationship between the doctoral student and industry professional. In order to complete their task, the team had to compromise and understand the limits and possibilities of their private/public collaboration. The co-design experience troubled the construction of a homogenous corporate subjectivity and the valorization of academia as the only safe space for critical intervention.

2. [Encountering the Unexpected Other: On Building an Intellectual Commons](mccoy), Gabe Malo

    Abstract: The creation of a collaborative syllabus across both academic and professional realms possesses unique challenges. This is particularly true when one realm places a higher value upon issues of representation, cultural studies, and global relevance. Negotiating these differences requires clear and open communication as well as a willingness to discuss and compromise around the issues that are extant in the subject of the course’s focus. In this essay, I discuss the challenges that arose during the creation of a collaborative syllabus between myself—a media scholar—and a technologically-focused journalist. The creation of the course—which was centered on the broad subject of hackers, hacker communities, and hacktivism—brought to light differences in ideology and perspective held by each of us both as individuals and as representatives of our professions. These issues focused largely upon issues of representation in gender, race, and geographic location. Discussing these issues was made more complex by the unique temporal constraints that our busy and frequently fraught schedules presented. Our eventual resolution of these issues was ultimately informed by existing discussions of collaboration within the digital humanities, particularly those utilized within collaborative game development and wiki-based collaboration. The evolution of the course from a strictly informative course to one centered around the creation of literary works lead us to consult existing work on collaborative writing courses. Ultimately, our experience serves as an object lesson in the ways in which ideological differences stemming from different professional backgrounds can result in creative and potentially innovative course design.

3. [Organizing for Organizers: A Systems Approach to Participatory Collaboration](simpson), elizaBeth Simpson

4. [Technology and Us: Localizing a collaborative syllabus for critical gaming at the library](FabianAnn), Fabian Prieto-Ñañez & Hong-An Wu

    Abstract: This paper serves as a documentation and reflection of our attempt to collaborate in creating a syllabus, which we entitled Technology and Us; we wanted to design a syllabus that could facilitate critical gaming in a community-based library setting with youth, such as Champaign, Illinois where we reside. However, as Taiwanese and Colombian scholars and students studying in the United States, we also share the commitment towards the home communities for which shaped our worldview. For that reason, our approach to design also considers the flows of technology knowledge across countries like Taiwan, Colombia, and the United States. This connection, and sometimes disconnection, directs our attention in ways that influence the possibilities of what we can envision through this syllabus; the preference for certain games and the informal structure embedded in the workshops offered by the library appeared as possible challenges in this proposal. In the end, these challenges have been factored into the design of this syllabus, in the ways that everything is flexible and subjective to change. Even though each session builds on experiences from previous meetings, they can still stand-alone. We intend this syllabus to be an iterative boundary object, continually revised according to the audiences it reaches.

5. [Scholarship from the Woods: Collaboration and Kinship with Nonhuman Companions](landau), Jessica Landau

    Abstract: Upon embarking on a project to co-design a syllabus for a hypothetical course as a critical exercise in collaboration, I realized that my scholarship often stems from collaboration with the non-human world. Grounding this discussion in relationships with my own pets, and particularly inspired by a backpacking trip I took in 2014 with my dog Piper, this article questions what it means to think with nature, instead of just through it. Using theorists as diverse as Donna Haraway and Barry Lopez, I attempt to create a method of collaboration with the non-human world that incorporates an ethical relating, allowing for modes of feedback and mutual development, instead of simply inspiration. This article questions the practical and ethical issues of removing scholarship from the academy and placing it instead in the woods, in the zones of the never purely human, in order to build a collaboration that extends beyond species lines, opening consideration of the non-human in generative ways. Can we use moments of ethical relating to disrupt our habitually human ways of being, looking and writing histories?

6. [Traffic in Mapping the Social](prutzer), Ned Prutzer

    Abstract: This chapter’s collaborative syllabus, [Visualizing and Mapping the Social] (https://docs.google.com/document/d/1S1KxYgbSG37cge0QORHkf6HgTX8L2WkAc7eofmneSbk/), explores the political and ethical implications of mapping and visualization. Co-constructing the syllabus with my partner Maja, a current criminology PhD student at Northeastern University, meant gaining both appreciation for the construction of expertise within disciplinary domains and interactional expertise with the various disciplines that stake claims into social issues. Within the projects the syllabus includes, different publics invoke collaboration to intervene in practices and realms of knowledge generally regarded inaccessible to them. Many of these collaborations (like that behind the syllabus itself) weave through the social sciences and the humanities. Collaboration between the two is key to analyzing the new kinds of data archives being generated, hence my engagement here with interactional expertise and collaboration. In this chapter, I focus on the metaphor of traffic, which extends nicely to the work of many of the groups our syllabus highlights as well as the process of constructing the syllabus itself. The latter, of course, reflects the time constraints the academy poses, which was certainly the case for us in this collaboration as two graduate students. Even as two graduate students who are life partners, we had to negotiate these considerations, especially with distance posing added obstacles. Here, I discuss how the syllabus emerged out of unforeseen constraints. I identify and detail three different modes of traffic that I noted within the collaboration and the subject matter of the collaborative syllabus itself.

7. [Alternative Histories of Computing at the University of Illinois: Hacking the Digital Imperative](stoytcheva), Sveta Stoytcheva

    Abstract: This essay introduces a syllabus for a hypothetical undergraduate seminar at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The syllabus, designed by a librarian in collaboration with a writing studies scholar, focuses on building students’ critical research and writing skills while engaging them in genealogical discussions about the university as an institution. On a campus with a strong engineering tradition, one where the “innovation history” is a dominant rhetorical register, this course highlights how computing artifacts on campus are embedded in multiple, often contradictory, histories. As a case study, this essay expands on one of the course modules: PLATO, or Programmed Logic for Automated Teaching Operations. PLATO, with its cutting-edge touch-screens and plasma displays, is a staple artifact in celebrations of local innovation. It is also prominently embedded in the histories of educational technology and, less prominently, of online social spaces. In addition to critiquing the technology’s role in the corporatization of education, it is possible to read PLATO into the genealogy of convivial tools that enable novel pedagogical formations. Similar arguments can be made for the other artifacts covered in the course: the ILLIAC suite of supercomputers and the Biological Computing Laboratory. By bringing these multiple histories to the foreground and giving students space to explore their points of convergence and divergence, the course aims to encourage students to engage in an “institutional identity exercise” – that is, to learn to question dominant narratives about their university and other institutions and to imagine alternatives to the status quo.

8. [Opening the *White Cube* and Finding it Empty: Codesigning a Pedagogy for Art In the Streets](seifert), Melissa Seifert

    Abstract: Within the discipline of art history, the gallery space has been referred to as a white cube, a space detached from everyday experience. In line with a long history of institutional critiques of this mode of exhibition my collaborators and I similarly find the white cube to be hollow, especially in its pedagogical offerings. This essay outlines a collaborative venture to create a pedagogical model for youth around street art in Milwaukee, WI. By drawing from our individual experiences in the study of art and urban history, activism, and public art, we focus on the history of art made and displayed outside the white cube. The essay recalls a history of community art in the inner city and critiques certain projects as Great Society initiatives that manipulated and suppressed black activism, especially after a string of race riots in the sixties and seventies. We use this history as a pedagogical tool to critique our own project as it develops. The syllabus for our course highlights local urban history and the history of policing, as well as urban development and decay while requiring students to physically create street art in a variety of media. We also address a recent trend in the ‘art world’ towards positioning street art as high art. By linking the course to the established local art community, we hope to revive important questions about art, space, surveillance, and the contemporary cityscape in Milwaukee, especially as the city’s art scene is increasingly fashioned as progressive and innovative.
