---
layout: post
title:  ""
author: Sveta Stoytcheva
---


## I. The Syllabus as Institutional Identity Exercise

In his essay, “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History,” Michel Foucault (1977) defines his concept of genealogy as a mode of describing history that rejects simplistic, teleological narratives of development. Instead, a genealogical investigation unearths multiple narratives – narratives that are related to one another in complex, often contradictory, ways. The pursuit of genealogy takes no institution for granted; everything is the product of context and contingency. Most importantly, institutions develop as a result of the interplay of the relations of power in which they are embedded (ibid). The draft syllabus below, for a proposed undergraduate course entitled “Alternative Histories of Computing at the University of Illinois,” takes up a genealogical lens to trace multiple histories of computing with their locus at the University of Illinois.

I designed this course as a master’s student in library and information science, with input from my colleague, Katherine Flowers, a doctoral candidate in writing studies. In the past, Katherine and I had discussed our experiences working with undergraduate students new to academic research and writing. As a graduate assistant at the university library, I had helped many students develop a research strategy and find sources for their papers. Katherine had several years of experience teaching first-year composition courses and had even helped to coordinate the program. Tasked with designing a collaborative syllabus, I saw an opportunity to think deeply about how students are introduced to research and writing in an academic context and invited Katherine to be my collaborator. We got together over coffee for another long conversation about teaching academic research and writing to first-year undergraduate students. We discussed how grounding these skills in a discussion of specific content (in this case, computing histories at Illinois) might be a useful way to tie abstract concepts to a concrete research project. I shared my tentative plans to include a few theory-heavy texts on the syllabus and Katherine assured me that, with the proper scaffolding,<sup><a href="#note1">1</a></sup> undergraduate students are certainly capable of engaging difficult texts. Later, she sent me a long list of writing studies resources, many of which ended up in the final version of the syllabus. A few of these resources, particularly the [Citation Project](http://site.citationproject.net/) and writing on the intersections of computers and composition, were often on my mind while designing the syllabus and continue to influence my practice as an academic librarian today.

The work that the syllabus attempts is twofold. Firstly, the course is intended to function as a kind of institutional identity exercise for students early in their tenure at the institution, prompting them to ask critical questions about the university and their place within it. This critical orientation is one that recognizes that (institutional) reality is always in the process of being negotiated. The course takes a genealogical approach: asking students to consider how artifacts that we may take for granted have complex and contested histories. Negotiating these complicated histories, in turn, creates a space to imagine alternative possibilities and ways of being in the world and in our institutions in the present. Given the prominence of engineering on campus, the syllabus considers the theme of alternative histories primarily through readings in the local history of computing.

Additionally, the course aims to introduce students to critically oriented research and writing practices. While introducing students to the mechanics of academic knowledge production, the course also highlights the complex economies in which these processes are embedded. The history of computing readings are paired with additional readings intended to guide students through the process of researching and writing a short paper and translating that paper into a collaboratively built digital exhibit. Here, the local focus of the content is useful because it means students can easily access a wealth of relevant primary source materials, including the rich collection of the University Archives. The archives represent yet another avenue for collaborative pedagogy and the syllabus includes a planned visit to the archives to meet with an archivist and discuss how materials related to the course are collected, organized, and contextualized.

The syllabus is designed for a fifteen-week undergraduate seminar with approximately two-thirds of the sessions devoted to content units on computing at Illinois and the rest to developing research and writing skills. In an effort to bridge the two themes, discussions of the computing readings are intended to highlight the rhetorical nature of those texts ― for example, by asking students to consider how their authors strategically address specific audiences. The readings in the first two weeks of the course are intended to do some framing work, locating the specific history of computing at Illinois within space and time. Similarly, Schiller’s introduction to *How to Think About Information* (2007) is intended to introduce students to the idea that information, far from being neutral and objective, is a valuable commodity embedded in various power structures. My intention is for this chapter to inform students’ subsequent interactions with the readings and their own research practices. When encountering new sources of information, I hope students will begin to ask certain critical questions: Who put together this resource? In what ways are they invested in it? What kinds of information may not be included here?

The course goes on to interrogate three different computing artifacts with local significance: the ILLIAC suite of supercomputers, PLATO, and the Biological Computing Laboratory. Each artifact is embedded within multiple, often conflicting, narratives. Finally, the course wraps up with a discussion of Philip, Irani, and Dourish’s (2012) excellent survey of postcolonial computing. Although many of the readings throughout the course do a great job of situating Illinois-specific history within a larger context, I want to avoid a myopic focus on a single, and relatively privileged, site. It is my hope that students who enjoy the course will see in this article a vast array of possible investigations into the histories of computing to which they are invited to contribute.

The dominant narratives around the computing artifacts at the heart of this syllabus are often innovation histories that foreground Illinois’ important contributions to the engineering sciences. One goal of the course is to foreground alternatives to these dominant narratives in the service of re-imagining present day institutional realities. My collaboration with Katherine was an important part of the process of designing this syllabus. In fact, collaborations between instructors, student-teacher collaborations, and students’ collaborations with their peers are arguably at the heart of educational endeavors more broadly. However, as entire industries emerge to place technology (in the form of data-hungry learning management systems, MOOCS, etc.) at the center of learning, these human collaborators are at risk of being devalued and devisibilized. Instead, how can we re-center alternative narratives of technologies that enable human collaborations?

As Lucy Suchman (2007) points out, technology is always also a cultural practice. In works grounded simultaneously in anthropology, science and technology studies, Suchman argues that interactions between humans and technologies are always situated and contextual. Technologies designed around supposedly universal actions actually constrict the field of possible interactions with that technology (ibid). How, then, do educational technologies presuppose certain modes of teaching and learning and preempt others? How can we, following Suchman, better appreciate the value of culture in situating interactions between students, teachers, and technologies? The PLATO unit of the syllabus is designed around these questions. Tracing the various genealogies in which PLATO is embedded can teach us a lot about how the relationship between education and technology can be configured.

## II. PLATO: A Genealogical Inquiry

In a recent blog post for the *New Yorker*, Justin Reich evokes the image of a PLATO classroom to reflect on several decades of development in educational technology, an industry which generated over half a billion dollars in the first quarter of 2014 alone (Reich, 2014). The acronym PLATO stands for Programmed Logic for Automated Teaching Operations. The project began at the University of Illinois in 1960, but soon grew into a large network of learning sites. In Reich’s view, although the industry has grown significantly, the kinds of skills computer-based education is able to convey successfully are still limited to questions that can be framed as simple pattern-matching problems. For Reich, the primary issue with computer-based education is that these are not the skills that students need in order to succeed in today’s job market (ibid).

Audrey Watters presents a grimmer diagnosis in a recent talk at New York University, entitled “Convivial Tools in an Age of Surveillance.” Beyond failing to prepare students for the realities of the job market, educational technology, she argues, has become “about control, surveillance, and data extraction” (Watters, 2014). Despite claims that computer-based education would lead to a more equitable society, in reality these technologies have reified existing power structures (ibid). As they have done so, they have been able to extract a tremendous profit, in large part through the collection of student data. Watters cites the CEO of Knewton, a vendor of online courseware, who once referred to educational technology as the “most data-minable” industry in the world (ibid). For Watters, this profit comes at the expense of students and re-inscribes social inequalities, while distracting attention from their systemic causes (ibid). After reading both of these essays, I couldn’t help but wonder: How does PLATO fit into this narrative? And how does it fit into yet other, less prominent, genealogies of computing?

Among core engineering circles, PLATO is a well-recognized part of University of Illinois history. In 1997, the University of Illinois held PLATOfest, a reunion of PLATO users (Silberman, 1997). More recently, PLATO featured prominently in the Academy for Excellence in Engineering Education’s October 2014 event, Engineering Education @ Illinois: Past, Present, Future. Don Bitzer, a lead developer of the technology, delivered a keynote at the event, which featured an original PLATO terminal (AE3, 2014). The Illinois Distributed Museum, an ongoing online project that aims to document the University’s role as a site of engineering and technology innovation, has both a page and a walking tour dedicated to PLATO (Illinois Distributed Museum, n.d.). Given that the Illinois Distributed Museum is still in the early stages of development, the fact that the pages for PLATO have already been developed out is significant. Within campus narratives around engineering innovation, PLATO computers’ plasma displays and touch-screen capabilities are often celebrated (see Kubetz, 2014). Beyond engineering circles of the campus, however, little of PLATO’s history seemed to be remembered ― even in sectors of campus, like Education, that had played key roles.

The official historical narrative on campus stressed engineering leadership and development around PLATO. While the technical development of PLATO at the University of Illinois was led by Bitzer and his team at the Computer-based Education Research Laboratory (CERL), multiple disciplines and departments played important roles in its implementation. For example, PLATO-based instructional materials were developed for courses in physics, chemistry, mathematics, and foreign languages (Smith and Sherwood, 1976). PLATO software ran on a mainframe computer that students were able to access through individual touchscreen terminals, often housed in separate buildings. Students worked through modular lessons individually, at their own pace, skipping past material that was too simple or redoing difficult lessons. Each module culminated in an auto-graded quiz that evaluated students’ progress. Instructors could program their own lessons using the TUTOR programming language developed for the platform. At Illinois, PLATO was integrated into classroom instruction in various ways, with classes spending designated time in the lab or using the system for homework assignments (ibid).

In my experience, narratives of PLATO on campus were largely celebratory framings that emphasized the engineering innovations it had engendered. PLATO’s more ambivalent ties to the corporate world and the nascent educational technology industry were given less emphasis. But in fact, encounters with the corporate world were part of PLATO’s development as well, at least from the 1970s onward. PLATO was based at the University of Illinois until 1976, when the project was acquired by the Control Data Company (CDC). Van Meer (2003) situates the development of PLATO within the context of a turn towards computer-based education that emerged in the 1950s, largely out of a need to optimize the efficiencies of higher education in the face of rising enrollment rates (ibid). While the project began as an University of Illinois initiative, the Control Data Company (CDC) became involved in the PLATO project early on, allowing Bitzer and his development team to use a CDC mainframe computer rent free in 1963 and packaging PLATO courseware for commercial distribution throughout the early 1970s. By 1976, the company had acquired all of the rights to the PLATO system. CDC’s acquisition of PLATO featured prominently in the company’s corporate strategy and reorientation into the domain of educational technology. William Norris, the CEO of CDC, was among the project’s most outspoken champions (ibid).

As Van Meer argues, PLATO became the keystone of the company’s new philosophy of corporate social responsibility. Norris’ vision for the CDC advocated for corporate investments and public-private partnerships to alleviate social problems, such as education reform and unemployment. These initiatives were never intended to be purely charitable, but were expected to generate significant profits and open up new markets for CDC products (ibid). Norris’ speeches about PLATO’s potential to be a vehicle for this new corporate philosophy are remarkable in the ways that they echo contemporary discourses around education reforms that propose technical solutions as a means to streamline education outputs. Significantly, in Norris’ vision for computer-based education, education is regularly equated with vocational training, which is then presented as a cure-all for a range of social ills (ibid).

> “...I believe it is increasingly evident that there is one segment in our society that can cut across these narrow, autocratic domains: private competitive enterprise. Corporations must be, and I believe want to be, more concerned with meeting the needs of society; and the number one need, after jobs, is higher-quality, more readily available education—at lower costs” (Norris, 1976, quoted in Van Meer, 2003).

These excerpts recall the rhetoric of contemporary educational technology ventures, many of which exist at the intersection of technology, personalization, and the privatization of public education—initiatives like the One Laptop Per Child program, Coursera, and Khan Academy, among others. These projects, which have a tremendous amount of corporate backing, do similar rhetorical work in framing social inequality (on a global scale) as simply a problem of access to technology and job-specific skills. Additionally, many of the criticisms levied at these projects ― that they do not actually improve student learning, that they engage in unethical business practices ― were levied at PLATO in decades past (ibid).

PLATO never became as profitable for CDC as Norris had imagined. Despite significant investments in the project over the previous decade, CDC sold the PLATO division in 1989 (ibid). The rights to the PLATO trademark and software were acquired by PLATO Learning, Inc. (Woolley, 1994). PLATO Learning, Inc. is now known as Edmentum, Inc.; the Minnesota-based company is a vendor of online education products. PLATO is still a part of the company’s portfolio, albeit no longer central to the company’s identity. This iteration of PLATO is a software suit, Plato Courseware, advertised as suitable for purposes ranging from supplemental learning to purely virtual education. In its description of Plato Courseware, Edmentum uses language common to many educational technology ventures: the rhetoric of “standards-based,” “innovative,” “21st-century” learning.

> “Plato Courseware is a standards-based online learning program grounded in a tradition of solid research, sound pedagogy, and applied innovation. We develop rigorous, relevant curriculum that challenges your students with a 21st century approach ― engaging them with interactive, media-rich content” (Edmentum, Inc., n.d.).

Although Norris’ efforts at CDC were ultimately unsuccessful, his strategy of corporate involvement in social problems, especially those related to education, has persisted. As such, PLATO should feature in any genealogy of educational technology not only on the basis of its technological contributions, but also because of the work it did in linking computer-based education to the discourse of corporate social responsibility. This discourse is reflected in many of the dominant narratives around the education technology industry today.

In addition to its place in the official history of educational technology and computing hardware innovation, PLATO is embedded in many other genealogies of computing. For example, users took advantage of the affordances of the program to create early online communities, like those formed around the PLATO Notes software. Originally intended as a back-end communication channel for PLATO developers, Notes evolved into a sophisticated online forum where users could chat in real-time. As PLATO terminals were installed in locations beyond the University of Illinois, this social network grew and expanded into the physical life-worlds of some users (Woolly, 1994). PLATO also facilitated the development of several very popular online games, including Avatar and Empire, written mostly by unpaid programmers in their free time (ibid). PLATO Notes, Avatar, and Empire have been preserved as part of Cyber1.org, a “living archive” of the PLATO environment. Users can download an emulator of the PLATO system and interact with others, including by playing multiplayer games, over the simulated platform (Cyber1.org, n.d.).

## III. Technologies for Human Collaborations

Although she doesn’t have many positive things to say about the present state of educational technology, Watters reminds us that the choice exists between accepting the status quo and seeking alternatives. Following Ivan Illich, she sees promise in so-called “convivial tools”; tools that, rather than being reductive, increase student agency and create avenues for equitable exchange between peers (Watters, 2014). While convivial tools do not have to be digital, the affordances of digital platforms create opportunities for this kind of pedagogical work. In a paper for the journal Computers and Composition, Clark (2009) reflects on her efforts incorporating the study of digital rhetoric into her composition classes. Educators, she argues, are faced with a “digital imperative.” Students must learn new strategies for communicating in a media landscape that demands new modes of communication. In her classes, Clark teaches students how to navigate (and write for) various forms of new media: e-portfolios, blogs, and online games (ibid). If we accept Clark’s premise that the ability to successfully navigate new media is an important aspect of preparing students for participation in civic life, then her incorporation of technology in the classroom can be read as an attempt to increase student agency. Importantly, in this example, student needs take precedence over particular technologies. Teaching students to write (and critically read) across platforms does not make writing education more efficient, nor is it easily assessed. Rather, this kind of pedagogy foregrounds complexity by highlighting the fact that writing is a deeply contextual act.

The Game Changer Chicago Lab, directed by Patrick Jagoda and Melissa Gilliam, is another example of a critically oriented pedagogical project that incorporates digital technologies. This project, initiated in 2011, uses games and other forms of digital media to engage youth around public health and social justice issues (Jagoda, 2014). The games are developed collaboratively by an interdisciplinary team of Lab fellows, which include faculty, graduate and undergraduate students, and high school students. Jagoda and his collaborators are aware of the utopian narratives around digital games, which promise easy solutions to complex problems of student engagement and attempt to quantify student learning through increasingly ubiquitous badges. Often these games are developed through partnerships with private companies, which use the platform to promote their own agendas (ibid, 196). In many ways, the rhetoric around these more mainstream digital games mimics the rhetoric around platforms like Plato Courseware. The work of the Game Changer Chicago Lab, on the other hand, shies away from making such grand claims. Instead, they frame their work as experimental and their focus is not on the final product of their efforts (the games themselves), but rather on the collaborative process and the new questions that their work raises. Jagoda describes the process of collaboration as generative, but also difficult: frustrating, negotiated, and intimate (ibid, 208). In acknowledging the complexity of the collaborative process, Jagoda gets at the concept of conviviality. As Watters notes, convivial tools are tools that *build* consensus, rather than demand (or impose) it (Watters, 2014).

While PLATO is most-often narrated as part of a straightforward history of innovation, the project’s relationship to the shape of computer-based learning and pedagogy in the present day is a complex one. The connection between PLATO and mainstream educational technology ventures is clear, if underspecified. The accidental outgrowths of the platform ― online communities and multiplayer games ― are often framed as predecessors to corporate social media platforms and games. However, they are also part of the genealogy of projects like the Game Changer Chicago Lab or Elizabeth Clark’s multimodal rhetoric curriculum.

Recognizing the alternative genealogies of technologies like PLATO gives us the opportunity to build on them in the present. These genealogies are potential models for reimagining convivial, situated learning technologies that enable human collaborations. Similarly, this proposed course seeks to foreground alternative histories around computing artifacts at Illinois and to interrogate how these histories intersect with and diverge from dominant narratives. The ultimate goal is to empower students, as critical researchers and writers, to reconfigure present-day institutional realities in ways that better accommodate a multiplicity of narratives. To that end, I welcome your feedback on this syllabus and invite you to adapt any portion of it that makes sense in your specific context.


## References

AE3. (2014). *Engineering Education @ Illinois: Past, Present, Future \[Poster\]*. Retrieved from [*http://ae3.engineering.illinois.edu/files/2014/09/PastPresentFuture.pdf*](http://ae3.engineering.illinois.edu/files/2014/09/PastPresentFuture.pdf).

Clark, E. (2010). “The digital imperative: Making the case for a 21st-century pedagogy.” *Computers and Composition 27*: 27–35. doi:10.1016/j.compcom.2009.12.004.

*Cyber1.org* (2014). Retrieved from [*http://cyber1.org/index.asp*](http://cyber1.org/index.asp).

Edmentum, Inc. (n.d.). *Plato Courseware*. Retrieved from [*http://www.edmentum.com/products-services/plato-courseware*](http://www.edmentum.com/products-services/plato-courseware).

Foucault, M. (1977). *Language, counter-memory, practice: selected essays and interviews* Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

Illinois Distributed Museum. (n.d.). *PLATO*. Retrieved from[ *http://distributedmuseum.blogspot.com/2013/01/plato.html*](http://distributedmuseum.blogspot.com/2013/01/plato.html).

Jagoda, P. (2014). “Digital humanities, new media, and practice-based research.” *differences: A journal of feminist cultural studies 25*(1): 189–215. doi:10.1215/10407391-2420045.

Kubetz, R. (2014, October3). *AE3’s ‘Past, Present, Future’ event features PLATO inventor.* Retrieved from [*http://www.ece.illinois.edu/mediacenter/article.asp?id=9601*](http://www.ece.illinois.edu/mediacenter/article.asp?id=9601).

Philip, K., Irani, L. & Dourish, P. (2012). “Postcolonial computing: A tactical survey.” *Science, Technology, & Human Values 37*(1): 3-29. doi:10.1177/0162243910389594.

Reich, J. (2014, July 8). *Will computers ever replace teachers?* Retrieved from[ *http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/will-computers-ever-replace-teachers*](http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/will-computers-ever-replace-teachers).

Schiller, D. (2007). *How to Think about Information.* Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.

Silberman, S. (1997). “PLATOfest to celebrate first online community.” *Wired*. Retreived from[ ](http://archive.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/1997/03/2518)[*http://archive.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/1997/03/2518*](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Farchive.wired.com%2Fculture%2Flifestyle%2Fnews%2F1997%2F03%2F2518&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGz4TKXKYyYjTq5x8dZaSWftEx3Fg).

Smith, S. G. & Sherwood, B.A. (1976). “Educational uses of the PLATO computer system.” *Science* 192(4237): 344–52. doi:10.1126/science.769165.

Suchman, L. A. (2007). *Human-machine reconfigurations: Plans and situated actions*. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Watters, A. (2014). “Convivial tools in an age of surveillance.” Retrieved from [*http://hackeducation.com/2014/11/13/convivial-tools-in-an-age-of-surveillance/*](http://hackeducation.com/2014/11/13/convivial-tools-in-an-age-of-surveillance/).

Woolley, D. (1994). “PLATO: The Emergence of online community.” Retrieved from[ *http://thinkofit.com/plato/dwplato.htm*](http://thinkofit.com/plato/dwplato.htm).

Van Meer, E. (2003). “PLATO: From computer-based education to corporate social responsibility.” *Iterations: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Software History* 2: 1–22. Retrieved from[ *http://www.cbi.umn.edu/iterations/vanmeer.html*](http://www.cbi.umn.edu/iterations/vanmeer.html).

<a name="note1" />I would be remiss to divorce these pedagogical concerns from the material realities of higher education. Proper scaffolding surely includes small class–sizes, and probably a fairly compensated teaching assistant, so that students have the benefit of individualized instruction as they work through difficult texts.

