---
layout: post
title:  "Technology and Us: Localizing a collaborative syllabus for critical gaming at the library"
author: "Fabian Prieto-Ñañez & Hong-An Wu"
---


## Hong-An’s Story

I grew up in Taiwan, where local gaming is a prominent part of youth boys’ socialization process. As a girl, I was never fully accepted and welcomed into the gaming domain, and yet my unfulfilled desire to participate in gaming culture led to my study of critical gaming in art education at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. My experiences allowed me to relate to gaming on multiple levels, as a Taiwanese interested in the popularity of gaming in a technopoly society such as the United States (Postman, 1992), as a woman who have been excluded from gaming culture, and as an educator invested in the critical use of gaming with youth; these relationships led to my commitment towards critical gaming as a Taiwanese scholar and community arts educator. As an academic scholar, my commitment to the academic communities lies in the various disciplinary concerns, such as the development of learning through gaming in art education and the improvement of an inclusive gaming culture in feminist studies. As a Taiwanese, my commitment to the Taiwanese communities lies in the translation of my analysis of gaming in the United States to the local context of Taiwan. As a community arts educator, my commitment to the Champaign-Urbana communities lies in the interests of the local youths who are actively involved in gaming cultures and the various community organizations that serve these youths.

## Fabian’s story

My story starts as a historian designing databases. While doing my undergraduate studies, I discover that some previous knowledge in programming was helpful to work with historical sources. I designed websites, and I tried to explore multimedia presentations. However, it was after earning my BA, when as a teaching assistant at my University, I started to work with a friend in designing activities for undergraduate courses. We explore different connections between blogs and wikis and spatial interventions in libraries, archives, and monuments. At that moment, we believed in the possibilities of using games as interfaces for learning. I started to be part of a free software community around education. Based on Sugar, the software originally designed for the One Laptop per Child, I volunteered as a promoter for using it in schools in Colombia. My current commitment is to understand the way people negotiate these global solutions in local spaces.

In fall 2014, we (Hong-An and Fabian) met in the course Collaborations in Feminism and Technology. We found common ground in our research interests as media scholars and educators, and we’ve decided to collaborate in creating a syllabus, which we entitled Technology and Us. We wanted to facilitate critical gaming in a community-based library setting with youth, in Champaign, IL.

Through the creation of this syllabus, our aim was to serve the various needs of our communities, reflecting from our multiple intersecting identities as academic researchers, community practitioners, and international students. However, as we delved into this process of collaboration, we’ve come to the realization that our commitment to these various communities results in localized concerns that compete for our attention. To create a syllabus that serves each of these identities, we must first address and resolve these localized concerns. Thus, this paper serves as a documentation and reflection of our attempt to reconcile these sometimes conflicting interests by placing this syllabus within the community contexts we in which we planned to work .

To address the various concerns that arise from our committed communities in relationship to critical gaming, we must first identify the diverse communities that shape our experiences and approaches to this topic. This action is by no means an encompassing representation of our identities; rather, this annotation is merely situating our positionalities in this collaboration by outlining the key constituencies that are at stake in our syllabus creation.

As humanist scholars, our commitment was to introduce video gaming, and gaming, in general, as a critical practice that shape the cultures for which we inhabit. We consider our paths for creating links between humanities and art practices for approaching not only video games but also a pedagogy of technoculture. As cultural objects, video games reflect societal norms and values, which allow us to approach institutions, representations and identities that characterize contemporary societies. Game designers structure the ways in which players can interact with this technology based on the goals and rules of games, which operates under certain assumptions about our bodies.

Besides imagining gaming as a critical space for social change in the theoretical sense, this syllabus was intended to be used in the Champaign-Urbana communities, where we reside. Specifically, we imagined this program for a particular group of youth audience, namely Edison Middle School students who visit the Champaign Public Library after school, and community educators, namely Everyday Arts Lab facilitators. Situated across from Champaign District Four Edison Middle School, Champaign Public Library hosts over 50 middle-school students each day after school. Various community organizations have initiated several afterschool programming to serve students that hang out in the library. These programs include the Everyday Arts Lab and the Champaign-Urbana Community Fab Lab.

In collaboration with these efforts, the art education program at the University of Illinois piloted the Everyday Arts Lab, in which Hong-An participates. The Everyday Arts Lab began hosting a series of after-school art programming once every week for five consecutive weeks each semester in 2014. During the spring semester, we noticed that youths at Champaign Public Library had strong interests in digital technologies and specifically video games. Thus, we tailored fall semester’s arts programming towards their interest and piloted the Video Game Modification Workshop.

Both the CUC Fab Lab and the Everyday Arts Lab have collaborated closely with the youths and librarians to facilitate programming opportunities that serve the interests and needs of the local youth. The primary concern has been to design gaming related activities that promotes the exploration of ideas along with the development of digital literacy.

In hopes of continuing these existing efforts, we conceived this tentative syllabus for an 8-week long workshop series called Technology and Us. We based our project on the idea of critical play in connection with the Video Game Modification Workshop by Everyday Arts Lab and the Minecraft camp by CUC Fab Lab.

As part of our encounters in discussing technology in our Collaborations in Feminism and Technology class, we arrive at different sources to begin our proposal. As formulated by Gee (2007), critical learning is “to think of semiotic domains as design spaces that manipulate us in certain ways and that we can manipulate in certain ways”. We also appropriated Flanagan’s framework of critical play in our proposal, as a way "to uncover some of the most interesting instances of artists’ works where play and criticality manifest” (2009). In that way, we positioned gaming in this syllabus as a space that invites critical interpretation and manipulation, as well as a conceptual space for social change.

## Localizing the international communities

As Taiwanese and Colombian scholars and students studying in the United States, we also share the commitment towards the home communities for which shaped our worldview. In our stories above, it is clear to see how our engagement with gaming in our countries led to the study of gaming. In light of our academic scholarship and community practice here in the United States, we are continually reflecting on similarities and difference from what we have perceived back home. This connection, and sometimes disconnection, directs our attention in ways that influence the possibilities of what we can envision through this syllabus. We can only imagine including a certain game title or a certain programming module based on what we have encountered before.

At the same time, our international identities compel us always to connect it or translate it back to the local context for which nurtured us in the first place.

Spatiality and temporality became the first point of tension that reminded us of the different concerns of our committed communities. Engagement in video games, as stated before, allow players to learn new rules instead of merely separating themselves from the real world. Players are learning the rules of the game and how to succeed according to those rules.

The choice to include what games into the syllabus that provided symbolic meaning introduced the question of what sets of rules are we to propose for critique. As games embodies the rules of the society that constructed it in the first place, which cultural ideas are we including in the syllabus?

Are we introducing games that normalized us as a child when we grew up, games that have been widely discussed in academic scholarship, or should we utilize games that a part of local youths lives?

Although our point of convergence has been the Champaign Public Library, as we inhabit this local space while earning our doctoral degrees, our hometowns shaped our experiences. Players challenge these narratives when they come into play and reposition the game based on their position.

For that reason, our approach to design also considers the flows of technology knowledge across countries like Taiwan, Colombia, and the United States. As stated by Flanagan, (2009) “if play is local, then play within those spaces cannot help but refer to, rework, or, conversely, avoid history, social relationships, and customs of a play site." Flanagan invites game designers to invent contexts for playing " one that inclusively examines empowerment, location, and the specificity of culture at that location". This result in our intention of the syllabus as one that is malleable by "reflective and sensitive in its design”(Flanagan, 2009).

We decided to include games that we played growing up, games that have been widely discussed as problematic, and games that we know of that the youths have engaged with before. However, these games only serve as starting points that are subject to the actual encounters of the facilitator and the participants; facilitators and participants are invited to add to this list for critique as they experience it. Instead of imagining the syllabus as a fixed object subjected to faithful transmission, we envisioned it to be a version subjected to iterations. This procedure resolves the problem of the unknown games that are currently captivating and engaging youth, and fulfill our expectation towards addressing our academic, and international communities. Moreover, by de-centering creativity from their straightforward relation with usefulness, we want to inscribe local experiences to comprehend global and apparently delocalized practices like online gaming.

## Closing remarks

In this article, we have addressed and outlined the various concerns that arose from our different positionalities and locals. The preference for certain games and the informal structure embedded in the workshops offered by the library appeared as possible challenges in this proposal. However, these challenges have been factored into the design of this syllabus, in the ways that everything is flexible and subjective to change. Even though each session builds on experiences from previous meetings, they can still stand-alone. We intend this syllabus to be an iterative boundary object, continually revised according to the audiences it reaches. When these sessions begin, and the events start, it is our intention that this syllabus be revised based on the needs, interests, and ability of the youth participants
