---
layout: post
title:  "Traffic in Mapping the Social"
author: Ned Prutzer
---

The chance to collaborate in a productive, scholarly manner with one’s life partner would intrigue many academics, particularly when the epistemological orientations of the involved scholars do not typically afford such encounters. Understandably, there also may be considerations that deter such collaborations. What, for instance, happens when hectic academic schedules get in the way, and what if that gets taken personally? How might that worsen when distance is involved?

In this chapter, I will discuss a collaborative syllabus on [*Visualizing and Mapping the Social*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1S1KxYgbSG37cge0QORHkf6HgTX8L2WkAc7eofmneSbk/edit) I designed with my partner, Maja Vlajnic. Maja is a criminology PhD student at Northeastern University who researches intersectionality and sexual assault. I work in media studies, but other lenses I adopt include those of the digital humanities and STS.

I met Maja in college and have known her for seven years. Since we both went straight from undergraduate work to a Master's program to our PhD work, we entered into academic work simultaneously. Though we were both English majors and met in college in a living-learning program centered on creative writing, as we proceeded along our separate academic paths, we often wondered when our academic interests would converge. Given this, *when the opportunity arose,* she was my first choice as a collaborator.

The collaboration, of course, would not have been successful if we assumed our intellectual merging would work seamlessly because of our relationship. However, we still anticipated an easier route considering the amount of time we share with each other and the shared language that inevitably develops out of a long-term partnership. What we were surprised to learn out of our collaboration is the degree to which traffic occurs even in face of these advantages. Our realization matches a broader tension within the syllabus itself regarding how to situate the collisions between different communities and realms of expertise.

## Traffic and Co-Constructing Syllabi

While traffic is unavoidable, we often see it as impeding progress and momentum. This is a limited view. Research shows, for instance, that ants, embracing collision as information toward locating food sources, move faster with more traffic. \[1\] Pedagogically speaking, too, traffic can have important metaphoric value. Our work collides with different disciplinary logics, state formations, and identities.

We must situate those collisions productively by pitting different vocabularies together and forging interactional expertise. Interactional expertise entails lay publics learning enough of a disciplinary vocabulary to be conversant in it and work through it. \[2\] This can entail, in my case, learning what an individual level risk factor is to understand the criminological literature that Maja contributed. When journal articles are filled with such unfamiliar terms within a different disciplinary vocabulary, interdisciplinary researchers must learn a great deal of a disciplinary lexicon.

The disciplinary differences that led to the emergence of traffic were mainly these matters of language, but there were also different epistemologies and conceptualizations of agency involved that we negotiated to reach a shared understanding. The use of methodologies between such disciplines can look quite different, requiring translation. Likewise, in our weekly case studies and the mapping projects they contain, we found ourselves returning to basic questions in sociology, such as the role of the individual versus the role of the society in different social issues.

Such questions begin to elucidate the workings of traffic in these issues. Here, I outline three types of traffic ― traffic in representation, navigation, and theorization ― relevant to the mapping projects our syllabus highlights. I start with traffic and representation to stress the forms of labor often rendered invisible in the final product of a given collaboration.

## Traffic and Representation

Mundane tasks in collaboration, such as deciding what topics to cover, in what order, and through which readings, and setting aside time to work, can post traffic for collaborations. Of course, the end product itself erases this everyday communication and various significant moments of insight. For instance, the use of a Google doc for our collaboration was a great way to address the problems of time that we faced, but disruptive in that we could not see prior versions of what we worked on. It is now difficult for us to retrace our steps.

Representation, then, can often occlude traffic. This is a problem, of course, that many collaborations face. For instance, we include Public Lab, a nonprofit which pursues collaborative grassroots mapping and civic technoscience, in our week on climate change. Public Lab claims its images are more real-time than those of Google Maps in knitting various overlays into one cohesive image. \[3\] Their images contain multiple photographic images over time in one image, rather than a single snapshot of the landscape, as Google Maps’ imagery does. \[4\]

Within this critique, Google Maps becomes analogous to a state perspective of mapping. In *Seeing Like a State*, James C. Scott discusses cadastral mapping, a “complete and accurate survey of all landholdings . . . to create a manageable and reliable format for taxation.” \[5\] One critique that Sara Wylie’s work, included in our syllabus, issues on Google Maps illuminates a problem Scott identifies in how states employ mapping. Scott contends that historically, mapping simplifies terrains, presenting space “like a still photograph” instead of “a scene of great turbulence.” \[6\] Our collaboration, too, falls prey to Scott’s simplifications. The syllabus represents the fullness of our collaboration and its insights inadequately, erasing the involved imaginaries, expectations, routes and detours.

One particular incident within our collaboration stands out in relation to those points. The Chicago ground stop last year delayed my arrival to see Maja the semester of this collaboration by about a day and a half, with only a long weekend to see her anyway. While we were planning on working on some of the initial steps of this collaboration then, before further developing the syllabus during our daily Skype conversations, this plan was derailed given the significantly limited time we had.

## Traffic and Intersectionality

Once Maja visited me later in the semester, we began work on the collaborative syllabus anew. Our delay after my ground stop experience was due to the difficulties of collaborating over Skype on such a project in a meaningful way. These conversations often involve trying to catch up on each other’s lives, attending to each other’s insecurities, and planning future trips to see each other. Each of these negotiations, never mind the act of collaborating on a 16 week class syllabus, are complex enough, so we lost track of the collaboration. At the start of her visit, though, Maja sent me an email with a literature review from a paper of hers on intersectionality relevant to our endeavors. Adorably enough, she titled the email “References for Friend!” With this email, we finally restarted work our work on the syllabus.

As different communities or disciplines collaborate, collisions occur between different vocabularies and orientations. With this in mind, what does it mean to confront the tensions of mapping between different identity groups and what does it mean to mash-up theory from different disciplines in that process? With such questions, the metaphor of traffic (which foregrounds intersectionality as coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw in another piece included in the syllabus) reveals traffic in theorization. \[9\] This is where Maja’s work was crucial in suggesting readings.

I also included texts theorizing otherness in relation to pedagogy. Henry Giroux's text, for one, underscores how media literacy recognizes labor and the cohabitations of various others within a cultural text. \[10\] In another selection, Chip Bruce, borrowing from John Dewey, values interactivity and adaptability within education to ensure an awareness of the contexts of different relevant concepts and technologies. \[11\] Both works pertain to theorizing otherness, interactivity and education, as we feel this course addresses.

There are several projects covered in the syllabus where this focus on otherness and collaborative pedagogy proves fruitful. Claiming Space, a queer GIS project enlisting academics and community members in a queer mapping of Seattle, is one example. After its completion, the GIS researchers behind the project published a paper on their experiences. They coin colliding epistemologies to underscore the negotiations and contingencies involved in the collaborative tensions between GIS and queer epistemologies on space. \[12\] This presents traffic in theorization. Social issues are enmeshed in a variety of broader systems, posing traffic. That necessitates different vocabularies to address the complexities of that web and the effect it has on how different identities are contextualized in different spaces.

## Conclusion

Fittingly, the title of this chapter has a double meaning. It refers to the traffic inherent both in mapping the social and in our collaborative project on mapping the social. Different disciplinary orientations renders traffic inevitable, but that traffic also carries great potential. The main lessons Maja and I learned are that collaborators must be prepared to work together to forge interactional expertise within the epistemological collisions that unfold and to represent those collisions in a way that demystifies backstage tensions. Mapping itself entails navigating traffic. I see no reason to avoid that within academic work, and plenty of reason to welcome it.

References

1\. Chris Cesare, “Why Ants Don’t Get into Traffic Jams,” 10 April 2015, accessed July 2, 2015, retrieved from http://news.sciencemag.org/plants-animals/2015/04/why-ants-don-t-get-traffic-jams.

2\. H.M. Collins and Robert Evans, “The Third Wave of Science Studies: Studies of Expertise and Experience,” *Social Studies of Sciences* 32.2, 235―96.

3\. Sara Ann Wylie, Kirk Jalbert, and Shannon Dosemagen, “Institutions for Civic Technoscience,” *The Information Society* 30 (2014), 119.

4\. Ibid.

5.James C. Scott, *Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed*, Yale University Press (1998), 36.

6\. Ibid, 46.

7\. Chris Perkins, “Plotting Practices and Politics: (Im)mutable Narratives in OpenStreetMap,” *Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers*, 2014.

8\. Ibid.

9\. Kimberlé Crenshaw, “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against Women of Color. *Stanford Law Review* 43.6 (1991), 1241–99.

10\. Henry Giroux, “Literacy, Pedagogy, and the Politics of Difference,” *College Literature* 19.1 (1992), 1–11.

11\. Chip Bruce, “Ubiquitous Learning, Ubiquitous Computing and Lived Experience,” in William Cope & Mary Kalantzis, eds., *Ubiquitous Learning* (pp. 21–30), Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2008.

12\. Michael Brown and Larry Knopp, "Queering the Map: The Productive Tensions of Colliding Epistemologies," *Annals of the Association of American Geographers* (2008), 98.
