---
layout: post
title:  "Scholarship from the Woods: Collaboration and Kinship with Nonhuman Companions"
author: Jessica Landau
---

Many of my most fruitful collaborations began far from the zones of human populations. In the summer of 2014, I made a short solo backpacking trip in Buffalo Gap National Grassland in South Dakota. I say I was alone because I had no human companions, however I was well accompanied, and guarded, by my small terrier mix, Piper. Nonetheless, my first night in Buffalo Gap was terrifying at moments. I heard what I believe to have been black footed ferrets fighting around 3am and I was convinced I would wake up in the middle of a heard of bison, unable to move until they decided to keep walking. But I didn’t. Instead, when I woke up at dawn, I noticed Piper was already awake. I sat up to see her sitting at the tent flap, looking out the mesh window at the sunrise and wagging her tail. She recognized before I did the beauty of the moment, that she was experiencing something special. And if that is too anthropomorphizing, then she at least was watching something that made her happy. I sat and watched her and looked at the sunrise myself for a few moments, then we got up together, had our breakfasts, I packed the tent, and we walked the many miles back to our car.

Most readers will probably think that backpacking with my dogs is a far cry from conventional academic work, and even further from the realm of collaboration — particularly in the task I was given of developing a collaboration in order to co-create an inter-disciplinary syllabus. And if you find yourself among that audience set, I don’t blame you*.* But the process of co-designing this syllabus — particularly as a critical exercise of collaboration — increasingly, and in fact surprisingly, made me aware of how intertwined these experiences of getting outside (both literally out of doors and metaphorically out of the academy) and connecting with the non-human world are with my more traditional human scholarship.

Frequently, my work examines how visual culture, particularly of the American West, natural history, and hunting, has constructed an idea of nature in the popular imaginary, and thus contributed to environmental devastation, the abuse of natural resources, and often the irresponsible, even immoral, killing of animals. These were the conclusions I wanted my hypothetical students to reach in a course titled ‘Picturing the End of Nature.’ This course design project initially began by developing two (conventional) collaborations with working artists and art world professionals: Erika Jorjorian, a junior specialist at Skinners, Boston, and a jewelry designer, and Kris Landau, an elementary school art educator and painter. But as I began work I soon realized that it seemed, at times, I had more than my two “official” collaborators on this project. I began to ask myself, when does thinking through nature become collaborative? Is it possible to collaborate with, or at least think with nature, with the more than human world? And if so, how do I begin to put such a relation (seemingly impossible at first glance), into real practice?

Reading and thinking with Donna Haraway’s *The Companion Species Manifesto* (a piece published more than two decades following her famed *Cyborg Manifesto*), that explored the inter-articulated contours of a seemingly mundane presence in human lives: that of human-canine relationships, was one of the first text-based encounters that opened such questions for me. As Haraway wrote: “The Companion Species Manifesto is… about the implosion of nature and culture in the relentlessly historically specific joint lives of dogs and people, who are bonded in significant otherness.”[^1] For Haraway, dogs are not ‘man’s best friends,’ but humans’ significant others, deeply connected by history, science, culture, and even genetics, despite our species’ differences. Dogs are not our mirrors, but *our others*, albeit special, significant, and deeply bound ones. As she further states: “The question turns out not to be what are animal rights, as if they existed preformed to be uncovered, but how may a human enter into a rights relationship with an animal?”[^2]

I encountered that piece in my first year of graduate school, after having lived with dogs my entire life. This was also the year that I adopted Piper, just 8 months old, in November of my first semester, after the death of my 17 year old Pekingese. While Piper and Bastian, my other scruffy terrier, have not been my constant companions, I fully understood that dogs have always had a significant place in my growth as an individual, and now, a scholar. So I began to question how can I enter into such a rights relationship with my canine significant others? Given how imbricated they are into everyday human lives and interactions, this seemed far from merely an abstract academic exercise. Before seriously considering *The Companion Species Manifesto*, I often understood my work concerning the end of nature and environmental issues in art as thinking *through* nature. Since then, however, I have begun attempting to develop a scholarship that thinks *with* nature. As Haraway describes our relationship with dogs, she believes that humans and dogs developed together, evolutionarily. When developing a “dog’s eye view” of the world, she thinks it is wholly possible that in a dog’s brain we belong to them as much as we think they belong to us. And in a sense, we as a species would not see as we see, sense as we sense, or “know” as we “know” without dogs. Piper and Bastian, my dog others, then, are not mere pets, but my significant others, who influence not only the quotidian factors of my life, but how I am enculturated to see, think, even be. How can I, or we as scholars, continue to give voice to this inter-relational way of knowing that is not bounded by the traditional version of human looking that art history favors?

Paying attention to our pets and the ways they move about the world becomes a daily reminder that our human way of looking and creating knowledge, even within a humanist lens, is almost always incredibly limited. As an art historian, I am trained to learn by looking and to attempt to influence the way others see. Exploring the world with dogs as my companions alerts me to ways of experiencing that are not based purely on the textual or visual. One afternoon, while walking in a ranch pasture in Wyoming, Piper and Bastian followed the scent of something (animal, vegetable, mineral — I will never know) into the tall grass. Being small terriers, the height of the prairie grass fully limited their vision. I watched, laughing, as Bastian dived into the grass, following his nose and ears, then alternatively jumped, straight up like a periscope, to regain his sight bearings.

While this could be an easy metaphor for thinking about knowledge production or pedagogy (we all learn about and explore the world differently), it was also an important physical difference in the way that my dogs approached the challenge of tall grass. If we can start to listen to our animal others, or rather smell to them too, we could hopefully reorient our understanding of the world to include perceptions and perspectives that not only encourage but are founded on principles of ethical relating. The visual matters, of course, but so does the aural, tactile and olfactory. By only writing it down, the ultimate aim of scholarly work, we are limiting the sources from which we gain knowledge. There are ways of knowing and of acquiring or creating knowledge that I will never have access to based on my biology. Are there ways, though, that we can tap into these differences, or learn to appreciate them? Perhaps we need to lead with our nose or our ears before we can stand up and look around.[^3]

In these ways, it was Piper and Bastian, through experiencing my daily life alongside theirs, who pushed me to explore ways to find kinship with the nonhuman world in my scholarship, and enter in discussion with other scholars and writers who were doing the same. The author Barry Lopez has written that the biggest problem in our (species’) relation with the natural world is that humans generate a culturally informed vision of it. While reflecting in the introduction to *Of Wolves and Men* on its writing, he states: “I remember sitting in this cabin in Alaska one evening reading over the notes of all these encounters, and recalling Joseph Campbell, who wrote in the conclusion to *Primitive Mythology* that men do not discover their gods, they create them. So do they also, I thought, looking at notes before me, create their animals.”[^4] For the next 270 or so pages, Lopez relates those creations, through mythologies, through fears, through hunting narratives, through firsthand accounts. In the American imaginary, informed by European mythology, the wolf is often dangerous, a symbol of the wilderness. The death of the wolf often aligns with imperial conquering and dominion over the natural world. And this type of powerful symbolism is indicative not only of the wolf, but has been invoked and reproduced in centuries of visual culture: in the artworks we celebrate, the material culture we use, and the narratives we tell, both in our history and as historical practice.

Reading Lopez, with Piper and Bastian at my side and pressing me onto the next page, I remember thinking how we do, of course, create our animals, as they are a part of the natural world that we also create. Our vision of nature exists as a cultural construct. Often fabricated, as the environmental historian William Cronon has also written that in opposition to the city, the country or the wilderness, is understood, seen and projected as both a space and an imaginary apart — separate from humanity, yet always subject to human drives for control. He describes this projected difference thus: “The boundary between natural and unnatural shades almost imperceptibly into the boundary between nonhuman and human, with wilderness and the city seeming to lie at opposite poles — the one pristine and unfallen, the other corrupt and unredeemed.”[^5] In fact, Cronon envisions the city and the country not as actual separate spaces, but as imagined places that are historically co-constitutive, developing side by side and reliant on each other for existence. He questions this projected division between the natural and unnatural not only in his own practice as an environmental historian, but in dominant treatments of nature in history: “Why had I seen some human changes as ‘natural’ — the farm, the woodlot, the agricultural countryside — but not the other changes that had made ‘nature’ into ‘city’? How could one human community be ‘natural’ and another not?”[^6] While reading these words for the first time, I looked down to find Piper and Bastian in their normal spots under my desk and chair, and wondered how I would have encountered these questions without them? Would it be different to read these passages, or ask these questions without them under my feet, or momentarily disrupting me by pawing at my lap? I am fully aware, however, that I know the answer, and that my scholarship and the questions I pursue would have been drastically different without the companionship of Piper and Bastian, and the many dogs I shared my life with before them. The question then becomes how to credit them, as dogs, and to continually benefit from the insights their companionship urges me to find.

Interestingly, even if unsurprisingly, my precedents for thinking with the non-human world have been, for the most part, not art historical. Art history commonly looks at representations of nature as purely cultural constructs, always firmly in the realm of the human: a wild and untamed place, full of dangerous animals, that could, however, be conquered and controlled for human consumption. Opening myself more fully, intellectually, not only emotionally, to the experiences of Piper and Bastian and their interactions with the natural world means that as an art historian, I need to not only find like-minded scholars, but at moments abandon what I consider to be traditional academic resources.

My syllabus was full of artworks — works from the American canon that often appear in standard art history classes for undergraduates — expressing the American landscape as a place both wild and conquerable that I too had encountered as an undergraduate: Thomas Moran’s *The Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone*, Frederic Edwin Church’s arctic scenes or Charles Nahl’s paintings of Californian mines from the late 19^th^ century. The American landscape was, and often still is, imagined as a wild frontier. However, I also included images representing the destruction and desolation of this frontier and the damage that results from the misuse of these resources: Bunky Echo Hawk’s allusions to environmental racism, David Maisel’s pictures of Montana’s open pit mines, or Andrew Moore’s *Disassembled Detroit*, and even Thomas Eakins nineteenth-century scenes of Philadelphia suggesting polluted rivers. With this variety of images, I began to wonder, in which images are the artists asking us to think *with* nature instead of *through* it? When does nature become more than an inspiration, but a collaborator?

The construction of the syllabus begins to question this formulation as well, by positing the natural world and non-human animals as contributors to the creation of imagery, as well as assigning art making projects that involve natural elements that partially dictate the ways in which they can be handled. In the course I proposed, by understanding my own pets as intellectual contributors, looking at or making art objects could no longer be limited to an entirely human exercise. An example of this can be seen in the assigned readings and proposed artworks for discussion for Week 12, centered on the theme of animals:

Week 12: **Animals**

Artists/Artworks:

-   George Shiras — early trap camera photos — idea of replacing hunting with camera hunting, continuing conservation theme

-   Joanne MacArthur

Readings:

-   David Abram, “Chapter 1: The Ecology of Magic,” *The Spell of the Sensuous*, New York: Vintage Books, 1996, pp. 3–29.

-   Finis Dunaway, “Hunting with the Camera: Nature Photography, Manliness, and Modern Memory, 1890–1930,” *Journal of American Studies* 34, no. 2 (August 2000), pp. 207–30

-   George Shiras, “Photographing Wild Game with Flashlight and Camera,” *The National Geographic Magazine* 17, no. 7 (July 1906), pp. 367–426.

-   Kerri Cronin, “Empathy Across Species Lines: ‘We Animals’: Photography and Activism,” presented at Photography and Empathy Panel, at UUAC, October 25, 2014, OCAD University, Toronto, Canada

Here, students are asked to read sources as diverse as contemporary philosophy and nineteenth-century hunting narratives, all of which develop differing degrees of animal agency. The artists discussed in this week, nineteenth-century photographer, senator and amateur naturalist George Shiras and contemporary photographer Joanne MacArthur both rely on the animal itself to participate in and in some respects create the image they are capturing. The photographs themselves are evidence of collaboration between humans and non-humans, including both the animal and the camera technology. Relating to the non-human world can happen at a much deeper level than simply capturing an image, however.

Lopez tells readers in his epilogue to *Of Wolves and Men* that the book was inspired by raising two wolf hybrids, Prairie and River, with his wife in Oregon. With his text, he is trying, in part, to re-write the history of the wolf, or at least reclaim the wolf’s place in the human imaginary. Partly drawn from indigenous narratives, the wolf is at times seen as a positive force in the world. Even more, Lopez develops a picture of the wolf as a wolf. As a separate being, a different species, whose mind and intellect we as humans can never fully understand.

By living with and observing the wolves closely, Lopez was able to view them, in some respects, as teachers, imparting knowledge that he could not acquire from any other source but nonhuman companions. He discusses learning more about the wild places he considered familiar by exploring them with his wolves.[^7] Living with wolves, and learning alongside them, showed Lopez that wolves are not meant to be dog-like domesticated creatures, but neither are they the dangerous man-eaters of fairytales and nightmares. While perhaps not a companion on the level of dogs, wolves too are our significant others, sharing a deep intertwined history with humanity. Despite this shared history, wolves are also simply wolves, in ways unknowable to humans. Lopez sees wolves and humans as living in separate realities that only sometimes interact or overlap. While we create our animals, and them us, we each also have a unique existence and expression of it, indecipherable to the other.

By understanding Prairie and River as simply wolves, defined in ways that we — as humans — can never fully understand, Lopez points to the fact that no matter how we picture nature and construct it within the popular imaginary, it will always exist as its own entity, beyond the totalizing control of culture or humanity. Lopez gestures to this when he writes:

> I do not think it possible to define completely the sort of animals men require in order to live. They are always changing and are different for different peoples. Nor do I think it possible that science can by itself produce the animal entire. The range of the human mind, the scale and depth of the metaphors the mind is capable of manufacturing as it grapples with the universe stand in stunning contrast to the belief that there is only one reality, which is man’s, or worse, that only one culture among the many on earth possesses the truth.[^8]

We may understand our construction of nature, but we can never fully understand a conception of nature from nonhuman perspectives. Or as Haraway tells us, “I believe that all ethical relating, within or between species, is knit from the silk-strong thread of ongoing alertness to otherness-in-relation.”[^9] Even in scholarship, therefore, we need to be mindful of how we interpret the nonhuman world, and strive to develop a bond of relating and consent rather than domination and surveillance.

Philosopher David Abram similarly believes that “we are human only in contact, and conviviality, with what is not human.”[^10] But for him, this difference is not a great divide, or at least it doesn’t have to be. Much like Haraway’s idea of significant otherness, Abram believes that we can only become fully human through fostering an understanding relationship with the nonhuman world. He states:

> This cycling of the human back into the larger world ensures that the other forms of experience that we encounter — whether ants, or willow trees or clouds — are never absolutely alien to ourselves. Despite the obvious differences in shape, and ability, and style of being, they remain at least distantly familiar, even familial. It is, paradoxically, this perceived kinship or consanguinity that renders the difference, or otherness, so eerily potent.[^11]

Like Lopez, Abram sees nonhuman agents as teachers, beings to learn from, even if not fully understood. Of a time he spent in a cave in Indonesia observing a spider spinning a web, Abram writes that it “shatters habitual ways of seeing and feeling, leaving one open to a world all alive, awake, and aware.”

So how do we get to a place, especially as scholars and specifically as art historians, where our relations with the nonhuman world help shatter our habitual ways of seeing and feeling? Is it even possible to collaborate with nonhuman agents? For many of these authors, they came to conclusions about collaboration with nonhuman animals through experiencing close relationships, or intimate isolated moments, like being trapped in an Indonesian cave during a monsoon. Many of us who have pet companions understand these moments; moments when we experience what can only be called non-verbal communications, interspecies instances of connection, where despite our profound differences we come to common understandings, or at least share common experiences, perceptions, feelings.

In order to understand representations of animals, nature and the non-human world, we must first understand how humans conceptualize nature, but also how we relate to it, and how that relating can shatter our habitually human ways of looking, seeing, feeling, and knowing. In my pedagogy, I hope to influence students’ understanding of art objects, particularly those that use natural elements as subject matter, or even more, incorporate them as media, to include more than the normative human perception. For example, Week 8 of my course examines how agriculture is represented art historically to not only understand how humans have shaped the natural world, but how plant species and the soil have shaped the way humans understand and relate to their environments and to each other. This is encouraged not only through looking at the artwork of Alexandre Hogue and Claire Pentecost, but also by having students work with the earth itself to create artworks with soil, a very limited media, inspired by Pentecost’s work:

Week 8: **The Farm/Agriculture**

Artists/Artworks:

-   Alexandre Hogue — The Crucified Land, 1939

-   Claire Pentecost

> Readings:

-   Mark Andrew White, “Alexandre Hogue’s Passion: Ecology and Agribusiness in *The Crucified Land*,” in *A Keener Perception*, pp. 169–88

-   Claire Pentecost, “Soil-erg” <http://www.publicamateur.org/?p=85>

-   Claire Pentecost, “Notes on a Project Called Continental Drift,” in *Deep Routes: The Midwest in All Directions*, Compass Collaborations, pp. 16–24

In class making assignment: Claire Pentecost — creating with soil

For Lopez, knowledge comes, in a sense, from not-knowing. By accepting that we can never fully know wolves, Lopez understands more about the human relationship with them, instead of less. He states: “To allow mystery, which is to say to yourself, ‘there could be more, there could be things we don’t understand,’ is not to damn knowledge, it is to take a wider view.”[^12] This wider view seems a lot like Abram’s shattering of habitual ways of understanding, and serves to disrupt art historical discourse by underscoring the mysterious nature of the art object, which is never subject to solely one interpretation or meaning, and in fact inheres multiple meanings, potentially across cultural boundaries or even species lines.

I believe we also need to understand the way that our perceptions of nature influence the objects we create (in my case, not only around visual culture but the powerful narratives we create, sustain and share around those objects) and how nature itself influences the creative practice and the creation of these perceptions. Our understanding of nature is not purely a cultural construct, but is in a sense co-constituted, with nonhuman agents. While we create the wolf, the wolf also creates the human. And while art history has indeed rendered the dog, the dog has rendered the art historian.

Lopez writes: “if we are going to learn more about animals — real knowledge, not more facts — we are going to have to get out into the woods”[^13] While Lopez, to some extent, likely means this literally, that we should experience nature from the source, I also want to discover ways in which I can write my scholarship from the woods, and explicitly outside of the museum, outside of the archive. So here again lies the importance of my initial story, of backpacking with Piper, and what it means for my art historical work.

In a sense, in projects where I consider animals, nature, and the nonhuman world in general, I see my dogs as collaborators. While my research often allows me to picture nature as a human cultural construction, Piper and Bastian force me to think through nature as spaces, animals, ecosystems, series of relationships. Thinking with them, rather than through them, forces me to see them as individual animals, not only cultural creations or symbols of love, loyalty, general dog-ness. Haraway writes that “dogs are not surrogates for theory; they are not here just to think with. They are here to live with.”[^14] And not just dogs, but all nonhuman animals are here to live with, even if not as intimately as we live with dogs. As the horrible stories of the death and torture of wild wolves related by Lopez show us, we could live with many animals much better than we currently do. And this is what I hope scholarship involving animals and the nonhuman world can accomplish; to show us that we can more ethically live with animals, and see them as collaborators in shaping our understanding of the world and the relationships we co-constitute.

A problem of scholarship concerning nature is that humans have separated themselves so much from it, and are so disconnected from the nonhuman world, that we can we can only imagine an animal’s understanding of the world, if we try even that. Although I spend every day living with Piper and Bastian, I can’t fully grasp their perceptions even though I do experience some of their joys, fears, and pleasures in the world. I know what scares them, what excites them, when they are happy, confident, and comfortable. And in turn, they know when I am happy, afraid, sad, when I need attention or affection from them. Regularly I am apprehensive about writing about my relationship and love for my pets in scholarly work; nervous it will be read as unprofessional, too emotional, even weak. But in this case, I need to address these relationships in order to understand a collaboration with animals because in most of my work that considers the nonhuman world, my dogs act as collaborators; as guides for relating to the nonhuman.

More than inspiration, my dogs help me think with nature, and not just through nature. Through experiences like watching Piper enjoy a sunrise in Buffalo Gap National Grassland (at a time when I went 20 hours without seeing another human), I am able to disrupt my habitually human way of thinking. Living with my dogs, as my significant others, forces me to question my own perceptions, which are not only enculturated, but also bound by my own human-ness. If I can begin to see the nonhuman world as a collaborator in the production of artwork, as many artists like George Shiras, Claire Pentecost, and potentially even Thomas Moran may argue, then I can begin to approach the analysis of artworks and the development of tools to interpret meaning as a collaborative process, influenced by a sense of place and situatedness in the landscape as well as a process of relating to nonhuman companions. I’ve learned from my dogs to appreciate objects, moments and feelings that may otherwise have gone overlooked, and I am trying better to incorporate their expertise, be it drawn from looking, hearing, smelling, tasting or instinct. Animals may not have anything to say, but that does not mean they have nothing to teach.

**Bibliography**

Abram, David. *The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-Than-Human World*. New York: Vintage Books, 1996.

Braddock, Alan. “Bodies of Water: Thomas Eakins, Racial Ecology, and the Limits of Civic Realism,” in *A Keener Perception: Ecocritical Stuides in American Art History*, ed. Alan Braddock and Christoph Irmscher, Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2009, pp. 129–50.

Cronin, Kerri. “Empathy Across Species Lines: ‘We Animals’: Photography and Activism,” presented at Photography and Empathy Panel, at UUAC, October 25, 2014, OCAD University, Toronto, Canada.

Cronon, William. *Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West*. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1991.

Diaz, Vicente, “Sniffing Oceania’s Behind,” *The Contemporary Pacfic* 24, no. 2 (2012): 324–44.

Haraway, Donna. *The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness*. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2003.

Johns, Elizabeth. “Claiming the Treasures of the Earth,” in *The West As America: Reinterpreting Images of the Frontier, 1820–1920*. Washington, D.C.: the Smithsonian Institution Press, 1991, pp. 218–26

Lopez, Barry. *Of Wolves and Men*. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1978.

McKibben, Bill. *The End of Nature*. New York: Random House, 2006.

Miller, Angela. “The Fate of Wilderness in American landscape Art: The Dilemmas of ‘Nature’s Nation,’” in in *A Keener Perception: Ecocritical Stuides in American Art History*, ed. Alan Braddock and Christoph Irmscher, Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2009, pp. 85–109.

Scott, James C. *Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed*. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998.

[^1]: Donna Haraway. *The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness*, (Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2003), 16.

[^2]: Haraway, 53.

[^3]: This idea is also drawn, in part, from Vicente Diaz’s article “Sniffing Oceania’s Behind,” from *The Contemporary Pacific* 24.2 (2012), which argues for an historical approach that disrupts a reliance on textual and visual histories and begins to consider a history of smell or taste as seriously.

[^4]: Barry Lopez. *Of Wolves and Men*. (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1978), 5.

[^5]: William Cronon. *Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West*. (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1991), 8.

[^6]: Cronon, 7.

[^7]: Lopez, 282.

[^8]: Lopez, 284.

[^9]: Haraway, 50.

[^10]: David Abram. *The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More than Human World.* (New York: Vintage Books, 1997), 2

[^11]: Abram, 16.

[^12]: Lopez, 284.

[^13]: Lopez 284.

[^14]: Haraway, 5.
