---
layout: post
title:  "Organizing for Organizers: A Systems Approach to Participatory Collaboration"
author: elizaBeth Simpson
---

AUTHOR’S NOTES: 1) Any reference to Larry Richards, unless cited, is my interpretation of our interactions, and is not necessarily an accurate representation of his thinking. 2) Our social and material interdependence means that we cannot be exempt from participating in one another’s lives, though we can forget that this is the case. To collaborate is to remember interdependence, and to choose an active role in shaping the consequences generated by our actions. In writing this article, I sincerely extend to you an invitation to collaborate with me in supporting contexts in which we learn how to choose coordination and consequence. Please read with an eye towards the questions and conversations we might share, whether a technical detail such as a page number for a citation, or a fundamental question such as whether effective collaboration is possible within hierarchies of power, for example, in a classroom.

NOTE TO EDITOR: I appreciate the invitation to link throughout the paper, especially to concept definitions. Though I’ve identified a number of places to do so, I’m not sure how to notate this to you. I’m also unclear whether external links need to be included in the reference section. Suggestion/advice are welcome.

NOTE TO EDITOR: Given our online format, I propose that this paper be presented with the title and author’s note followed by the set of links as follows:

-   INTRODUCTION: Why a course on collaboration? For whom?

-   TWO APPROACHES TO PRAXIS: A proposal to engage theorists in practice and practitioners in theory.

-   PRINCIPLES, LANGUAGE, SYSTEMS, PARTICIPATION: Key orientations to participatory collaboration, course design, and course concepts (within this section, the “CYOA” format remains intact)

-   THE COLLABORATION: An introduction to the collaborators and factors affecting their work.

-   METHOD AND OUTCOMES FOR DEVELOPING COURSE CONCEPTS: Community inquiry for course design.

-   PRACTICES FOR PARTICIPATION: Design principles for course activities.

-   CONCLUSION AND OUTCOMES: Summary, and reflections on the impact of this project since its completion.

\^End of links

**INTRODUCTION**

“The movement towards participatory governance is a journey filled with potential pitfalls,

for the concept itself strikes at the foundation of the well defined, tradition-based

bureaucratic organization of schools.” (Golarz, p.1)

“A radically revised educational system is one of the prerequisites

of my proposed dialogic process of design.” (Richards, 2009, p.25)

In response to the invitation to collaboratively design a course, I chose to create a class on participatory collaboration because I value doing culturally meaningful work, and anticipated that the resulting syllabus could be an offer to specific communities of practice which value democratic participation. The communities I intended to serve through this project include participants in the [New England Workshop on Science and Society](http://www.cct.umb.edu/sicw/newssc.html)[^1], the many people and groups associated with the [Fellowship for Intentional Community](http://www.ic.org)[^2], the affiliated communities of [Pedagogy and Theatre of the Oppressed](http://ptoweb.org)[^3], and the [Allied Media Projects](https://www.alliedmedia.org)[^4]. In specific, I kept three local organizations in mind: the [Independent Media Center](http://www.ucimc.org)[^5], the [School for Designing a Society](http://designingasociety.org)[^6] and [Makerspace Urbana](http://makerspaceurbana.org)[^7].

Additionally, I was aware that such a resource would be valuable to a general population as well; as a scholar of small group communication, and as a professional facilitator, I have consistently been amazed by the degree to which people assume that they know how to work together at the same time that they are at best modestly proficient, and at worst, act in stark opposition to their individual and collective interests while claiming to be collaborating.

The common assumption that one has the skills to collaborate well is likely an artifact of the frequency with which people have experience in groups (e.g. classrooms, work environments, families.) However, I assert that many, and perhaps most, groups do not elicit participatory collaboration as defined in this paper[^8], and so the average person has very little opportunity to actually experience or develop these skills. Perhaps ironically, I was aware that my target audience could have a higher than average degree of experience with collaborative environments. However, even in groups that value collaboration, such as those who employ collective decision-making, it is uncommon that such processes are supported though member education, which is essential to counteract the patterns of participation learned in other types of groups where power imbalances are expected or encouraged. As a result, even people who regularly work on teams or doing community organizing can lack skill in participatory collaboration.

While the accompanying syllabus (HYPERLINK) provides a resource in the recognizable product of our work, this paper serves to provide a potentially equivalent resource: the pedagogic framework underlying it. After introducing the collaborators and considering some factors affecting our work, the frames of systems, language, and participation are examined. Finally, the course structure, concepts, and activities are discussed. For full benefit, the reader is encouraged to use the supplied links to the syllabus and to reference it throughout.

**TWO APPROACHES TO PRAXIS**

My formal interest in collaboration began with my involvement in the intentional communities movement[^9], and was fostered through exposure to grassroots conferences[^10], community projects[^11], and mentorship with civil rights leaders[^12]. At the same time, I often worked in public schools, first as a teacher, and then as the director of a Peer Mediation program. When I began graduate school in my 30s, I saw the value of distinguishing myself as a “community member who is also a graduate student”. On a campus where, of 60,000 students, most might never seek to know the town and history within which they live, claiming connection with my context became a subtle way to insist on praxis from both sides of the town/gown divide.

In academia, advocacy for praxis is often a call to integrate practice with theory. However, as a community intellectual I have advocated equally for those who are “on the ground” to integrate theory into their practice. Therefore, in taking up the assignment to create a collaborative syllabus, I set out to create a course on participatory collaboration that would provide not only exposure to concepts and tools, but also facility with those tools through immersed practice. For practitioners (i.e. members of a community organization such as Makerspace Urbana), involvement in such a course would be a call to observation and reflection. For theorists (i.e. college students), it would be a call to engage. Given my commitment to accessibility and translation of knowledge across community and academic populations, this meant that the course would necessarily have to serve as a functional resource both for a traditional 16-week academic course, but also for community settings or contexts with alternative time constraints.

To bridge this potential contradiction in purpose, I sought to create classroom as laboratory on Latour’s terms; to make a space that destabilizes the differences between inside and outside (1999)[^13], which, in the case of a classroom, is to blur the distinction between “in school” and “in society,” potentially increasing the possibility that a classroom would foster social responsibility.[^14] In order to fully embrace the promise of praxis, it was important to me that the process of syllabus design be one in which my collaborator and I not only discussed *ideas* of collaboration in a community context, but actually engaged in collaboration as our process.

**THE COLLABORATION**

As my primary partner, I invited [Larry Richards](http://www.iue.edu/people/bio/bio.php?bio=laudrich), who I met as a fellow visiting participant in the School for Designing a Society perhaps 12 years ago, but who also holds the position of Chief Academic Officer and Chief Enrollment Officer at Indiana University East, after many years of being a professor in both Management and Engineering.

Larry describes investigation of language,[^15] dialogic process,[^16] and participation as his life’s passion (Richards, 2009). Given his experience as an educator as well as his commitment to community, I knew that we could design a space to support what Larry calls “deliberate thinking,” and thus generate the participation and social responsibility that stems from it.[^17]

Larry has spent much of his career thinking and writing about the prospects for a participative-dialogic society in the context of systems and cybernetic concepts. With 32 years of experience as a higher education administrator, he is more convinced than ever that such a society implies a new form of educational system (not merely an improvement on the current system). However, he also recognizes that any new system (or society) must arise out of the current one, as an alternative to the current one, but an alternative that can be deemed desirable only in the new society. The dilemma this poses is obvious—we need a new society to provide the rationale for a new system and we need the new system to generate a new society.

Larry and I first met each other through the School for Designing a Society, a non-institutional, collaborative community project that for more than three decades has emphasized language, performance, and composition investigating “what do I want?” as a strategy for social change. We developed additional means of interacting through the [American Society for Cybernetics](http://www.asc-cybernetics.org) (ASC), which provided a supportive environment for our engagement of systems thinking Our histories in these initiatives are significant as context to this project because much of our design[^18] approach, as well as much of the course content, has roots in the overlap of these domains.

Without such a long personal history, and likely more importantly, without our individual commitments to cooperative approaches as well as our attention to dynamics of hierarchy, it’s very reasonable to expect that collaboration between Larry and I would have been fraught with the challenges that accompany work across power differentials. For example, differences in age, gender, and academic status could very well have led to an imbalance of authority and impact during decision-making. As it was, the primary way that this difference exhibited itself was though inhibition on my part to “burden” Larry with progress that I felt wasn’t sufficiently developed. After our initial conversations, I would hold off on sharing until I felt a concept was “good enough.” However, the project may have been served better through sharing earlier and more often, allowing Larry to contribute to developments in their ambiguous stages rather than effective limiting him to the more restricted role of providing feedback. This sort of behavior, while ostensibly due to deference to his higher status as an academic, actually gave me more control over the direction of the project, though it was my intention to share power. At the same time, this dynamic was interesting in that it mirrored the ways in which I drew on concepts from a number of Larry’s published works, giving him feedback about those “completed” ideas, which then informed subsequent conversation and the development of course concepts.

Another key inhibiting factor in our work was distance. The few times that we were able to collaborate in person had a markedly different quality of interaction. For example, in order to talk from afar, we needed to plan ahead, coordinate schedules, and follow the general etiquette for phone calls, which requires almost continuous talking. By contrast, talking while on a walk through the local prairie during a visit allowed for pauses and reflection that better matched our thinking styles. Though they can be taken for granted, so-called “water cooler” conversations, including those before or after formal meetings, are fertile spaces for both the relational and conceptual work of collaboration. I suspect that, should we have lived in the same town, this project would have unfolded quite differently.

Nonetheless, Larry and I were able to converse regularly enough to afford a few iterations and reiterations of project design. The linearity of writing implies a hierarchy, however, the actual unfolding of our design process was largely recursive. General conversations about collaboration led to talk of systems, language, and participation. These led to the development of course concepts, which in turn reshaped our initial formulations of how to support participatory learning about collaboration. Therefore, the second part of the paper, which explores three orientations that informed the design process, is presented much like the course itself: offered in segments that can be explored in any order.

PRINCIPLES (link to section)

LANGUAGE (link to section)

SYSTEMS (link to section)

PARTICIPATION (link to section)

**NOTE TO EDITOR: beginning of linked sections)**

PRINCIPLES

Over the course of a few formative conversations supported by shared online documentation, Larry and I saw a number of principles emerging to guide our work:

-   Approach the project from a second-order systems perspective informed by our personal experiences with social change and systems theory

-   Stipulate and support principles of collaboration in all phases of the project, including the interactions of the designers, the affordances of the syllabus design, implementation of the course, and interactions between teacher-student, student-student, and course-community, towards increasing interest in participation

-   Employ a constraint-based, rather than goal-oriented, frame for assessment

-   Attend to language about and within the course

These principles are unfortunately unusual in a traditional learning environment. It may not be surprising, then, that we employed unique structures to facilitate them in our course design. We began the course with a module on purpose, so that students could re-orient from a language of causality to one of emergence. We followed this with a module on collaboration in which students create their own definitions (and later included a module that addresses language and its dynamics directly), and a module on systems, which serves in large part to provide concepts and language with which to explore them. As a follow up to the module on systems, we provide one on patterns, which serves to orient students to particular patterns that have emerged in our social system (e.g. social identity, oppression) that will likely impact their capacity to participate and collaborate. With the exception of the first four classes and the final session, all of the classes are modular in format, allowing the direction of the course to be responsive to the needs and interests of the students. The self-directed nature of the course is essential to support effective participation (LINK TO PARTICIPATION SECTION), as discussed in a later section.

**LANGUAGE**

“The language which you don’t speak will speak you.” (Brun, 1986, p. 5)

In the title of their book, Miles Horton and Paulo Friere remind us that, in popular education, *We Make the Road by Walking*. (1990) As described in the radical constructivism of Heinz von Foerster (2002), we also make the world by talking. Through our experiences in both administration and social change work, Larry and I have learned to recognize the significance of language as a source of influence in the social world. Stressing another point on the importance of language, David Strauss emphasizes that, in collaboration, it is vital both to have a common language of process and to guard against misunderstood agreements. (2002) Therefore, we began our collaboration with a conversation about how we wanted to talk about what we were talking about.

The first and ultimately most influential term that we considered was *participation*. Larry described it as: “when a person makes a difference and is aware that she makes a difference,” to which I added the context of “in a social system.”[^19] (Personal communication, October 2 2014) As this example demonstrates, Larry and I did not insist on congruent use of language between us, though we sought to understand each other’s use of words. Differences in perspective are compatible with our definition of *collaboration*; when two or more people who have desires (which can differ among participants), work together on a task, project, etc., or the avoidance of one. This is one of the benefits of a constraint-based approach: as long as what either of us wanted didn’t occlude what the other wanted, we could move forward. By contrast, if we had been goal-oriented, we would have been limited to only the possibilities delineated by agreement.

We further considered that *cooperation* could be used to describe collaboration towards a common desire, and *coordination* as when two or more entities sustain an interaction that would not be constrained if they were not interacting. Defining these terms from one another was particularly important because, as Mattessich et al. has described, the terms are often used interchangeably. (2009)

One other term, *social change,* held particular significance for us. This was described both as “a change within a system, or a change of system where there is an observed shift in the pattern of dynamics of interaction among a set of participants,” and as “when, at minimum, a group of individuals see their social system changing into alignment with the meeting of their needs, as a result of their actions.” (Personal communication, October 2 2014)

**SYSTEMS**

“As our world continues to change rapidly and become more complex,

systems thinking will help us manage, adapt,

and see the wide range of choices we have before us.” (Meadows, 2009)

Though both Larry and I have a background in systems theory, it was not a matter of habit that led to our employment of a systems framework for this course. Many critical educational practitioners and theorists invoke a systems view. When describing his approach to education, Paulo Friere asserted that students “come to see the world not as a static reality, but as a reality in process, in transformation.” (1993) Addressing the role of teachers, Ella Baker said that it is the work of leaders to make complex ideas accessible. (in Ransby, 2009) In discussing the challenges of a creating a democratic classroom, Landon Beyer describes the “unpredictability of the classroom events (as) closely related to the inherent messiness of democratic practices in general.” (1966) These descriptions beg the requisite variety of the language of systems theory to sufficiently map the non-linear, lived experience of students in and out of the classroom.

Employment of a systems frame allows for flexibility in classroom design and management, because unlike the usual power play seen in traditional classrooms, “ambiguity is not a threat when control isn’t sought,” (Wynne, 1992) An instructional approach that values emergence rather than goals de-emphasizes a teacher’s need for power, providing a context for the inevitable ambiguity of a student-centered learning environment. This is important because, for most people, tolerating ambiguity requires confidence that it is acceptable, most often because it is seen as appropriate within a recognizable, non-ambiguous superstructure. Invoking a heuristic frame provides such a structure. Tolerating the ambiguity of a destabilized hierarchy is valuable for participation in collaboration within the classroom because, as Larry writes, “collaboration happens when people work together. If that collaboration is organized as a stable hierarchy, the contributions that individuals can make will be limited to those compatible with the hierarchy. A participatory form of collaboration ensures that every individual can make a difference through the unique contributions they have to offer.” (Personal communication, July 5 2015)

Many of the inhibiting factors to collaboration involve fear of our collaborators’ inability to meet our needs. What would be required of us as educators to trust our students as collaborators? One response is to “trust the process” of collaboration. However, the positive spin of this aphorism is misleading. As example, the process of the perpetuation of implicit bias is trustworthy, that is, it will likely reproduce itself until actively interfered with. We can also trust the process of capitalism to consolidate wealth into small oligopolies. So, while many processes are trustworthy, they may not be desirable. Therefore, it is imperative to first see and understands the systems of which we are a part, and then design processes within those systems in full knowledge that this may ultimately change the system itself. Then, in light of these layers of observation and reflection, we might have the confidence to endure ambiguity in the hopes of realizing the collaborations we preach are possible.

**PARTICIPATION**

“For learning to occur, mistakes must happen. Mistakes become mistakes when they are responded to as mistakes, by others or ourselves. Treat these moments of mistake as opportunities to learn. Give these opportunities to others by responding to their mistakes. Do so, so that designing a society can continue to happen. With a continuous, worldwide process of designing a society, we might see the attenuation, if not the elimination, of human misery, violence and war.” (Larry Richards, 2009)

“She would sit there and she would almost literally let a meeting fall apart… because she wanted the decision to come out of the group and not be hers.”

(Lenora Taitt-Magubane, about Ella Baker, in Ransby, 2005)

We titled the course “Participatory Collaboration.” The use of “participatory” as an adjective implies that there are forms of collaboration that are not participatory. As with the term “participatory democracy”, this distinction is purposeful, indicating that, to the greatest extent possible, the course will emphasize collaboration in which all people affected by the collaboration are part of its decision-making processes, including many elements of content design. Increasing participation and interest in participation were central motivations to create this course. Why all this attention to participation? Because, as Larry writes, “a democracy assumes not only that everyone has a right to be involved in decisions that affect them, but also that every individual has a potentially unique contribution to make to the society in which they live. Only through full and open participation can that contribution be realized.” (Personal Communication July 6 2015) Key theoretical ground for exploring participatory democracy can be found in the critical pedagogic practices of Ella Baker and Paulo Friere.

Friere’s approach was influenced both by his experiences as a teacher and his training as an academic. Though Baker never attended graduate school, and to the best of anyone’s knowledge was unaware of Friere’s publications, (Ransby, 2009) her pedagogic practices acted in parallel. Though their paths did not cross, practices derived from their work are often united under the joint term, “popular education.” Interpreting their work in tandem makes sense, given each educator’s insistence that intellect is not catalyzed by educational systems per se, but through acting on the world (Friere, 1993) and by “think(ing) in radical terms.” (Baker in Ransby, 2009) Both Baker and Friere asserted that in order to enact liberatory praxis, a shift must be made in the status quo of how educators and organizers approach students and communities. Friere described common educational practices as the “banking model” of education, in which students are passive recipients of knowledge, and asserted that it couldn’t be used for liberatory practices. (1993) Therefore, if education is to be, as Baker insists, an egalitarian structure (Ransby, 2009) or as Friere desires it, the practice of freedom (1993), the structure of the learning environment must be markedly different than what is usually found in the classroom. As Larry writes: “If learning occurs when conversation occurs, and is therefore a creative act, the premises of modern education need to be turned upside down and inside out.” (2009)

How, then, can we as educators avoid the banking model in support of participatory democracy in the classroom? We can look first to Baker and heed her admonitions that the role of a leader is to tap into the people and that, as a leader, one should approach each community with humility, seeking to build trust and engage in democratic decision-making without privileging an expert, instead letting marginalized people come to the center so that each person plays a role in their own emancipation. (Ransby, 2009) Then, taking advice from Friere, we can see that the instructor must refrain from projecting ignorance on the student, instead developing a relationship of teacher-as-student-as-teacher where student and teacher are partners in learning. (1993) To do this, Friere recommends problem-posing education in which a problem is identified and learning occurs while solving it; what Neil Postman later called inquiry-based education. (2009)

Larry defines a problem as occurring when there is a desirable situation that doesn’t match one’s current situation. (2009) Similarly, Strauss defines a problem as a situation that someone wants to change. (2002) In each definition, a problem requires a person who wants something. Therefore, in order to engage in problem-posing education, the students as well as the teachers must identify something that is currently the case but which they wish were different. For us, creating this syllabus was a way to address the problem of insufficient participation in our communities. We hope that, for the teacher, teaching the course might be a way to address a problem. For the students, the first module of the course is an invitation to identify what they want such that engaging in the course is a relevant solution strategy. In this way, the course begins to become important to all of its participants, and every participant becomes necessary as a means to address the problems that participation in the course can begin to solve.

**(\^NOTE TO EDITOR: end of hyperlinked sections)**

**METHOD AND OUTCOMES FOR DEVELOPING COURSE CONCEPTS**

“Community inquiry is inquiry conducted of, for, and by communities

as living social organisms.” (Bishop et al., 2009, p.6)

With systems (LINK TO SECTION), language (LINK TO SECTION), and participation (LINK TO SECTION), as anchoring frames, Larry and I needed to decide what would be “most useful” to teach about collaboration. In order to narrow down this vast scope of into a reasonable set of concepts, and to hold ourselves accountable to the principles of collaboration that we espouse, we drew on practices of community inquiry (Bishop et al., 2009) to seek out concepts that would be useful to the communities who might engage with the syllabus. To do so, we employed the following lines of inquiry:

> *When is collaboration? What does it look like? *
>
> *What books, websites, platforms, tools, technologies, or other resources have you encountered that you thought were helpful to collaborative projects? *
>
> *What are barriers or inhibitors to collaboration? *
>
> *When do you/people not want to collaborate?*
>
> *Why/when do you/people not feel invited/able to collaborate?*
>
> *Why do you/people leave collaborative situations?*
>
> *Why doesn't it work?*
>
> *What conditions and practices support collaboration? *
>
> *When do you/people want to collaborate?*
>
> *Why/when do you/people feel invited/able to collaborate?*
>
> *Why do you/people join collaborative situations?*
>
> *What is working when collaboration works?*
>
> *What are the characteristics of, and differences between DIY culture, do-ocracy, and Do-it-Ourselves/Do-it-together culture? (and/or related ethics) *
>
> *Where do we see collaboration? What are current and historical examples? *

We first sought responses by hosting an input table at the Midwest MakerFest, an annual event for makers in the Champaign-Urbana, IL community hosted by Makerspace Urbana, a vibrant, independent, volunteer run community space in Urbana, IL that seeks to bring diverse people together though creative/technical projects. We then had a group conversation with the members of Makerspace Urbana. We also invited both scholarly and civic input by creating a wiki page,[^20] inviting about 100 people identified as specifically interested in collaboration to contribute their input. In sum, we received input from 26 unique individuals, about 1/3 of whom identified as academics. With these results, we undertook an informal qualitative analysis, looking for concept overlap. Though there were clear trends, (e.g. communication and listening) there were still far too many concepts to cover in one course. Ultimately, we took our own advice and employed a constraint based approach, asking: of all the concepts collected, what will assist students in thinking about their group as a system of systems (individuals) and the dynamics, emergent properties, and points of leverage (choices) that exist or could exist in either the group and/or individual systems? From this, a set of organizing topics emerged: purpose, collaboration, systems, patterns, design, obstacles, communication, conflict, environment, intergroup relationship, participation/leadership, structure/process, problem solving, and intervening in a system. To accommodate the 16-class academic structure, we subdivided problem solving into three parts, adding decision-making and creativity to total 15 modules and a final session.

**PRACTICES FOR PARTICIPATION**

One of the key aspects of this course is making thinking about collaboration visible through conversation, reflection, and documentation. Meadows bemoans that this is “done hardly at all in social science or management or government everyday life.” (2009) To afford these interactions, Larry and I grounded the course in three related tools that support the popular education pedagogy of this course:

1\) knowledge-generating conversation;

2\) ongoing, responsive mapping of the group as a system; and

3\) self-reflective decision-making about what to learn next

Larry asserts, “conversation is the dynamics of knowledge” and “conversation is the converse of control; it supports the autonomy of the participants.” (2009) Friere claims that it is only through communication that human life can hold meaning. (1993) Baker calls for leaders to let the oppressed speak for themselves. (Ransby, 2009) Therefore, the primary learning practice of this course is conversation.[^21] Once in conversation, for example, during circle shares and story circles, students re-invent their experiences as knowledge, positioning themselves as teachers. In their work on supporting a data literate citizenry, Twidale et al. (via the Association of College and Research Libraries) define information literacy as knowing when information is needed and being able to locate, evaluate, and use it. (2013) Calling on students to generate content from personal experience and asking students to decide what to learn next are practices that engage this form of literacy, which is essential for full citizenship in a information-soaked society.

Strauss devotes an entire chapter of his book on collaboration to harnessing group memory (2002). And, as Wylie et al. describe in their work on civic technoscience, “the mapper is the map.” (2014) By inviting students to draw and re-draw themselves as systems, students practice the application of concepts and the generation of knowledge in one act, while seeing themselves “seeing themselves” in a recursive form that engenders self-reflection at a systems level while operationalizing the concepts at hand. At the same time, by making maps students generate collective knowledge repositories that provide a level playing field, avoid the limitations of words, inhibit information overload and memory loss, and mitigate repetition, disruption by latecomers and misunderstandings underpinned by a loss of focus. (Strauss, 2002)

Ella Baker said that it was important for organizations to yield and shift as new needs arise. (Ransby, 2009) In a pre-determined course, the structure is only marginally able to respond to student needs through the ingenuity and adaptability of the instructor. With a flexible, choice-driven, module-based structure, not only can the content be responsive, providing information on a need-to-know basis (an approach advocated by Philp et al. in their work on postcolonial computing in 2010), but its salience will also be magnified though its application towards the problem it is responding to. A module-based structure also allows for the adaptation of the course to those constrained by time, i.e. each module can be taught independently of the others, as time allows. This opens up the possibility of participation beyond the college classroom, to more types of people and groups, facilitating one of the initial purposes of the course: increased social responsibility through increased capacity for collaboration.

**CONCLUSION AND OUTCOMES**

“Dissection is an essential part of the scientific method, and it is particularly tempting to disassemble a life composed of odds and ends, to describe the pieces separately.

Unfortunately, when this is done the pattern and loving labor in the patchwork is lost.”

(Bateson, 1990)

The approach that Larry Richards and I took towards designing this course presaged its outcome. By engaging a systems approach with attention to language, we, in collaboration with others, used conversation and mapping tools to identify and define course concepts. Throughout the process, we paid attention to dynamics of our participation, paying particular attention to what we wanted to avoid. A key avoidance we identified early on was the interpretation of collaboration as dividing up the work among individuals. Though I undertook many of the technical aspects of developing the syllabus proper, I believe we were successful in keeping the larger project, that of exploring participatory collaboration, as an emergent property of our joint interaction.

My criteria included creating a syllabus that would both garner the approval of my professor while leveraging academic resources to serve communities of practice, and to build personal and intellectual ground with Larry, who sought to support my work, engage with our mutual interests, and explore non-traditional learning practices. Larry found benefit in exploring alternatives to current educational systems with someone else, and in listening for alternatives he hadn’t imagined. Specifically, he found ideas for encouraging and valuing the normally less talkative participants, and for limiting the more domineering, even if well meaning, participants particularly valuable. I immensely enjoyed the opportunity to engage with Larry on topics that we’ve circled around for years, and by collaborating with him, to enhance our capacity for future collaboration.

This project was also a unique chance to harness academic energy to generate a resource that stems from but extends beyond the walls of academia, helping me vitally integrate my experiences as a scholar and community member. To this end, the support of Professor [Anita Say Chan](https://media.illinois.edu/anita-say-chan) was invaluable. As this paper has demonstrated, it is not enough to tell students to work together; one must design structures that facilitate collaborative engagement. It is therefore important to remember that it was not merely the assignment but Dr. Chan’s course *design* that facilitated the creation of the collaborations whose documentation populates this edition of Hybrid Pedagogies. Of particular use were the many course readings that demonstrated community-engaged research, the assignment to both complete a collaborative project that generated an object (syllabus) and a reflection on the process of generating the object, and the allocation of class time for student accountability in the form of presentations on work-in-progress.

The creation of a syllabus for a course on participatory collaboration has already yielded numerous outcomes. For example, over the summer I was able to put the contents of this course to use as part of a research project to support visiting scholars in supercomputing collaboratives. But this is only one known result among the whisperings of many potential shifts. During the spring of 2015, this work was presented both at the New England Workshop on Science and Society in Woods Hole, MA and at the [HASTAC](https://www.hastac.org) 2015 Conference in Lansing MI. Ensuing conversations included much discussion on the concepts of trusting students, taking constraint-based approaches to course outcomes, employing modular course design, engaging self-reflection as a joint principle for students and teachers, developing shared language within a group, the value of invigorating systems theory with critical pedagogy and women of color feminisms, and the call to clarify one’s theoretical perspective as a teacher. The future impacts of these conversations are very exciting to us. We look forward to continuing to learn how the resource of this syllabus and paper, which a colleague described as perhaps the only place wherein these concepts coexist, can inform and potentially enhance the capacity for participatory collaboration in our schools and communities.

**References:**

Beyer, L. E. (1966). *Creating Democratic Classrooms: The Struggle to Integrate Theory and Practice*. New York: Teachers College Press.

Bishop, Ann P., Bruce, Bertram C, & Jeong, Sunny (2009, March) Beyond service learning: Toward community schools and reflective community learners. In Loriene Roy, Kelly Jensen, & Alex Hershey Meyers (eds.), *Service learning: Linking library education and practice (pp. 16-31).* Chicago, IL: ALA Editions.

Bruce, B. C. (2009). Ubiquitous learning, ubiquitous computing, and lived experience. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), *Ubiquitous learning*. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Brun, H. (1986). *My words and where I want them.* London: Princelet Editions.

Constitution. (n.d.). American Society for Cybernetics. Retrieved December 9, 2014, from http://www.asc-cybernetics.org/organization/constitution.htm

Freire, P. (1993). *Pedagogy of the Oppressed*. (M. B. Ramos, Trans.) New York: Continuum Publishing Company.

Golarz, R. J., & Golarz, M. J. (1995). *The power of participation: improving schools in a democratic society*. Sebastopol, Calif.: National Training Associates.

Horton, M., & Freire, P. (1990). *We Make the Road by Walking: Conversations on Education and Social Change*. Temple University Press.

Latour, B. (1999). Give me a laboratory and I will raise the world*.* In M. Biagioli (Ed.), *The science studies reader.* New York: Routledge.

“About Makerspace Urbana,” Makerspace Urbana, accessed September 1, 2015, http://makerspaceurbana.org/about-mu/about-makerspace-urbana.

Mattessich, P. W., Murray-Close, M., & Monsey, B. R. (2001). *Collaboration: What Makes It Work, 2nd Edition: A Review of Research Literature on Factors Influencing Successful Collaboration*. Saint Paul, Minn: Amherst H. Wilder Foundation.

Meadows, D. H. (2008). *Thinking in Systems: A Primer*. (D. Wright, Ed.). White River Junction, Vt: Chelsea Green Publishing.

Postman, N. (2009). *Teaching As a Subversive Activity*. Random House LLC.

Philip, K., Irani, L., & Dourish, P. (2012). Postcolonial Computing: A Tactical Survey. *Science, Technology & Human Values*, *37*(1), 3–29. doi:10.1177/0162243910389594

Ransby, B. (2005). *Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement: A Radical Democratic Vision*. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.

Richards, L. (2009). *Larry Richards Reader*. Jason Marerro, Ed. Urbana, IL: School for Designing a Society.

Strauss, D., & Layton, T. C. (2002). *How to Make Collaboration Work: Powerful Ways to Build Consensus, Solve Problems, and Make Decisions*. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.

Twidale, M. B., Blake, C., & Gant, J. (2013). Towards a data literate citizenry. In *iConference 2013 Proceedings* (pp. 247–257). doi:10.9776/13189

von Föerster, H. and Poerksen, B. (2002). (Translator: Karen Leube). *Understanding systems: Conversations on epistemology and ethics.* New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum

Wylie, S. A., Jalbert, K., Dosemagen, S., & Ratto, M. (2014). Institutions for Civic Technoscience: How Critical Making is Transforming Environmental Research. *Information Society*, *30*(2), 116–126. doi:10.1080/01972243.2014.875783

Wynne, B. (1992). Misunderstood misunderstanding: Social identities and public uptake of science. *Public Understanding of Science*, *1*(3), 281–304. doi:10.1088/0963-6625/1/3/004

[^1]: The New England Workshop on Science and Social Change (NewSSC) organizes innovative, interaction-intensive workshops designed to facilitate discussion, teaching innovation, and longer-term collaboration among faculty and graduate students who teach and write about interactions between scientific developments and social change. New England Workshop on Science and Social Change, Accessed September 1, 2015, http://www.cct.umb.edu/sicw/newssc.html.

[^2]: The Fellowship for Intentional Community (FIC) nurtures connections and cooperation among communitarians and their friends. FIC is a 501(c)(3) Non Profit that provides publications, referrals, support services, and sharing opportunities for a wide range of intentional communities, cohousing groups, ecovillages, community networks, support organizations, and people seeking a home in community. “About the Fellowship for Intentional Community,” Fellowship for Intentional Community, Accessed September 1, 2015, http://www.ic.org/the-fellowship-for-intentional-community/

[^3]: Pedagogy & Theatre of the Oppressed, Inc. (PTO) supports people whose work challenges oppressive systems by promoting critical thinking and social justice through liberatory theatre and popular education. It fosters collaborative connections to share, develop, promote, and document liberatory theatre, popular education, and other revolutionary actions. PTO serves as a resource for oppressed peoples and their allies in diverse communities, contexts, and traditions around the world. “About,” Pedagogy and Theatre of the Oppressed, Accessed September 1, 2015, http://ptoweb.org/aboutpto/

[^4]: Allied Media Projects cultivates media strategies for a more just, creative, and collaborative world. We serve a network of media makers, artists, educators, and technologists working for social justice. Our definition of media includes all forms of communication, from videos and websites to theater, dance, design, and interactive technology. Through the [Allied Media Conference](https://www.alliedmedia.org/amc) and the [Sponsored Projects](https://www.alliedmedia.org/sponsored-projects) program, AMP shares and supports models for using media for transformative social change.Our work is grounded in [Network Principles](https://www.alliedmedia.org/network-principles) developed and evolved through dialogue with our uniquely diverse and collaborative community of participants. “About,” Allied Media Projects, Accessed September 1, 2015, https://www.alliedmedia.org/about/story

[^5]: The Urbana-Champaign Independent Media Center is a grassroots organization committed to using media production and distribution as tools for promoting social and economic justice in the Champaign County area. We foster the creation and distribution of media, art, and narratives emphasizing underrepresented voices and perspectives and promote empowerment and expression through media and arts education. “UCIMC.org” ucimc.org, accessed September 1, 2015, http://www.ucimc.org

[^6]: The School for Designing a Society, established in 1991, is a project of teachers, performers, artists, and activists. It is an ongoing experiment in making temporary living environments where the question “What would I consider a desirable society?” is given serious playful thoughtful discussion, and taken as an input to creative projects. “About,” School for Designing a Society, accessed September 1, 2015, http://www.designingasociety.net/about-2

[^7]: “Makerspace Urbana, a working group of the Urbana-Champaign Independent Media Center, is dedicated to enabling the blend of arts, humanities, science and technology. Our mission is to provide an open community lab where people of diverse backgrounds can learn, teach, tinker, collaborate, share, innovate, socialize, and create.” “About Makerspace Urbana,” Makerspace Urbana, accessed September 1, 2015, http://makerspaceurbana.org/about-mu/about-makerspace-urbana

[^8]: The use of “participatory” as an adjective implies that there are forms of collaboration that are not participatory. As with the term “participatory democracy”, this distinction is purposeful, indicating that, to the greatest extent possible, all people affected by the collaboration are part of its decision-making processes.

[^9]:  “‘Intentional communities’” include [ecovillages](http://www.ic.org/directory/ecovillages/), [cohousing](http://www.ic.org/directory/cohousing-communities/), residential land trusts, income-sharing [communes](http://www.ic.org/directory/communes/), student [co-ops](http://www.ic.org/directory/co-ops/), spiritual communities, and other projects where people live together on the basis of explicit common values.” “Welcome to the Fellowship for Intentional Community,” Fellowship for Intentional Community, Accessed September 1, 2015, http://www.ic.org

[^10]: e.g. [Critical Resistance,](http://criticalresistance.org) [Allied Media Conference](http://www.alliedmedia.org)

[^11]: e.g. [Independent Media Center](http://www.ucimc.org), [Makerspace Urbana](http://www.makerspaceurbana.org), [Showing Up for Racial Justice](http://www.showingupforracialjustice.org),[ CU Citizens for Peace and Justice](cucpj.org)

[^12]: e.g. [Bob Moses](http://tellingstories.org/mccomb/bmoses/index.html), [Curtis Mohammad](http://tellingstories.org/mccomb/fullmovies/curtis-muhammad/index.html), [Grace Lee Boggs](http://graceleeboggs.com)

[^13]: Because the topic of my syllabus was also the topic of the course that spawned the project, numerous readings from that course designed by Anita Say Chan informed the syllabus design process. In addition, I am grateful to a summer research study on collaboration guided by Marshall Scott Poole for illuminating many resources that were employed in this project.

[^14]: “An awareness of my desires with respect to the consequences of my thinking and action in conversation, AND the thinking and action of others.” (Richards, 2009)

[^15]: “Central to radical constructivism is the role of language. In radical constructivism, the meanings of words, phrases, sentences, etc., and the uses of language, are constructed by individuals through experiences that we call interaction with others. Adaptation of our language occurs as we experience failures and successes in meeting our needs and desires with respect to coordinating our actions with those of other humans. In this sense, the phenomenon of language is like other phenomena we experience and build into our system of knowledge, with one major difference: unlike other phenomena, language is our only access to these other phenomena, as well as to the concept of language itself.” (Richards, 2009)

[^16]: Call the dynamics of recurrent interactions in language “dialogue.” (Richards, 2009)

[^17]: Other core collaborators included: Lee Worden, an applied mathematician who studies ecology, evolution, and mutual aid; Max Liboiron, an artist and STS professor with a strong practice of engaging in civic technoscience; and Peter Taylor, who heads the program on Critical and Creative Thinking at UMASS, and who also stewards the yearly “New England Workshop on Science and Social Change” (NEWSSC) which Max, Lee, and I have attended numerous times.

[^18]: “I use the word “design” when I talk about a process in which constraints are created, dissolved, or transformed. The process of design I wish to propose is one in which these constraints are made explicit and accessible to all who wish to participate in the process.” (Richards, 2009)

[^19]: It is important to note that here, making a difference is to be understood dynamically, rather than in through common frame of linear causality.

[^20]: This wiki was public and governed by a creative commons license. It included the following question-based sections: When is collaboration? What does it look like?; What books, websites, platforms, tools, technologies, or other resources have you encountered that you thought were helpful to collaborative projects?; What are barriers or inhibitors to collaboration?; What conditions and practices support collaboration?; What are the characteristics of, and differences between DIY culture, do-ocracy, and Do-it-Ourselves/Do-it-together culture? (and/or related ethics);Where do we see collaboration? What are current and historical examples?

[^21]: Conversation is here defined as: “a particular dynamics of interaction of actors, in a language, in which an asynchronicity in that dynamics moves toward synchronicity. A mutual preference by the actors for recurrent interaction initiates a conversation, and sustains it until synchronicity (agreement) is reached or the actors lose interest. “(Richards, 2009) “The elements of a conversation include: Humans (participants) ; Language (all types) ; Self-consciousness (self-description in time); Composition (creation of asynchronicity); and Desire for recurrent interaction (love).” (ibid., p.65)
