***Encountering the Unexpected Other: On Building an Intellectual Commons\
***

The process of deciding upon a mutually agreeable topic for exploration for a collaboratively created syllabus between my partner and I was actually a relatively quick one. It was going to be hacker subcultures; it was *always* going to be hacker subcultures. My selected partner, Sean, was a tech journalist with two decades of experience who currently works as a writer and editor for a widely-recognized technology news website. One of the areas of focus in his reporting has been hacker subcultures; he has always made a conscious attempt to portray them in a way that he feels is fair and accurate. In my case, I had just finished earning my Master’s degree in Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, and had moved on to a PhD program in Media Studies at the same university. Like Sean, my interests largely revolved around research interests revolve mainly around digitally-based communities and subcultures, with my questions stemming from issues of representation and identity. This includes both the identity of individuals within a particular digitally-based subculture and of the subcultures as a whole when viewed from an outside perspective. While Sean’s approach was entirely journalistic, my own approach was academic—and that placed us squarely “outside” each other’s disciplines. More importantly—and perhaps most appealingly to me—he was someone with whom I have maintained a close friendship for nearly a decade. Although I knew that the idea of reaching across disciplines for this project, in all honestly, terrified me, I figured with Sean, our work together would be a cinch.

When I pitched the idea to Sean, he seemed excited about it. He expressed some reservations about the workload; tech journalists operate under a notoriously heavy burden of article creation, and he seldom had time for creating his own individual work. I assured him that I understood that our collaboration would present some significant logistical challenges. From our previously-standing friendship, I knew that he was constantly on deadline, that his availability was spotty, and that, when he was available, it would only be for short bursts of time. I explained that I would be doing the lion’s share of the work, and that I would be leaning on him mostly for reading suggestions, brainstorming, and alternate perspectives. I was looking to him mostly for his expertise in accurate portrayals of individual hacker’s and hacker groups’ narratives. He said that he would be happy to provide whatever perspective and guidance he could throughout the process of the course’s development. By the end of our brief meeting, I felt confident we would be able to smoothly coordinate our efforts.

Eager to get started and conscious of his limited time, I conducted the preliminary work of syllabus formation without any direct collaboration. I knew that one of the most frequent recurring themes in his articles was news regarding hackers and hacktivists and, and a result, I thought that a course that focused on covering these groups in a journalistic sense would be an interesting avenue to take. Given our close friendship, I naively assumed that our perspectives on the subject would be similar if not identical. Over the first two months I gathered together a handful of related readings and began to sketch out a rough course timeline. These materials were largely focused around the popular perception of the hacker archetype and its grounding in gendered and racially-biased attitudes and assumptions about the adopters and users of technology. As the preliminary course developed, its structure began to center heavily around issues of representation and identity within journalistic portrayals of hacker culture. In particular, I focused upon groups that were conducting hacker-like activities in countries outside of North America and Europe—a topic that I found both tantalizingly interesting and refreshingly untapped. I couldn’t wait to share the progress I’d made.

At our second meeting, I shared the work that I had completed thus far to Sean, seeking his input on the general direction of the course, on the existing readings, and on the course’s target and design. Given his busy schedule, I expected that he would probably approve generally of my efforts and perhaps even provide some guidance regarding the latter part of the course, during which the practical aspect of creating journalistic pieces would be explored. I assumed without qualification that he would endorse my emphasis on representation as a key theme of the course readings and lectures. To my surprise, however, this was not the case; instead, his feedback focused upon the readings that I had already selected—or, more accurately, the readings that I *had not* selected. He objected to the emphasis I had developed on hackers and hacktivism outside of traditionally Western or Euro-centric constructs, and to my putting those as the initial readings for the course. While he acknowledged the importance of alternative narratives, felt that it was more important that the students learn about the history of hacking. Surprised, I remember asking for clarification—after all, defining hacking’s “history” can be approached in a number of ways. As he began his explanation, I realized that the narrative he was concerned emphasizing with was the same Western, white-male-centric narrative that dominates popular consciousness. He talked about social engineering and phone phreaking, about Kevin Mitnik and Captain Crunch. He believed that even a course that was primarily focused upon a counter-narrative to the very male, very white popular perception of hacking needed to begin with this “basic” history in order to provide students with what he considered to be necessary background knowledge. And while I recognized these as a very familiar narration of hacker history, and conceded that it could potentially be useful, it was not a foundation that I wanted to reauthorize or reify in the course under design. I felt strongly that in using this narration to lead into and introduce the alternative hacker narratives I hoped to bring greater visibility to, we would still be setting up the white, western male archetype as “normal” and the representations that I wanted to highlight as “other.” That I was uncomfortable with this setup and format seemed to him to be unreasonable.

By the end of that meeting, I was mildly shaken and utterly confused. Our perspectives were normally so congruent that previously we had never experienced anything but mild disagreement. That this seemed to be such a stark and impassible difference between us was entirely unexpected for me. After taking a few days to collect my thoughts and process our conversation, I began to try to wrap my head around the root cause of our clash. I wondered if it was really fundamental ideological differences that drove this sudden conflict, or if such differences instead stemmed from practical distinctions present within our day-to-day work culture. Was it even possible to separate the two?

My collaborator has been a tech journalist since I was in elementary school; as a result, his priorities and sensibilities regarding topical importance are tightly related to the popular definition of “news.” Meanwhile, my own priorities and sensibilities were largely informed by my time in academia, during which I have extensively focused on feminist and, to a lesser extent, post-colonial narratives. Both of us were using the approach that was most natural for us, and we were both used to our preferred perspective dominating the work that we created. When it came to course design, however, our perspectives were apparently wholly incompatible. The design of the course dictated that we provide the students early on with the fundamental information that they would need in order to navigate increasingly specific and advanced course topics. Our differing perspectives made agreeing upon these fundamentals nigh-impossible. Additionally, the nature of our project and our own personal investments in the topic made both of us reluctant to reconsider the primacy of our perspectives. I felt as though creating our project as a syllabus placed it squarely in the academic realm, and that therefore my philosophical concerns should take precedence. Meanwhile, he felt as though the fact that it was billed as a journalism course placed it squarely within his realm, and that his concern with the popular parlance and news-worthiness should determine its philosophical sensibilities. We were, it appeared, at a nearly complete impasse. It seemed to me then that our collaboration would be a complete disaster.

Reflecting on the stubbornness the exercise surprisingly brought out in us brought to mind the semester’s earlier readings—in particular, Tapscott & Williams’ *Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything*. I recalled how in it, the authors describe the intractability of various companies who were wedded to their own particular points of view and business plans and perspectives. For them, the prospect of open-source culture represented a threat to their internal culture and to the integrity of their finished products as they related to a closed system of values and priorities. While collaborating with a single collaborator is by no means mass collaboration, I thought to myself about how in practice for me, the weight of its challenge felt no less real and no less impassable. Considering such positions, it occurred to me moreover, that, the fact that we came from such wildly disparate backgrounds mean that it could be the case that it wasn’t just us as individuals who were collaborating; but how it could be, in a way, the entirety of our professional and academic backgrounds that were drawn together, face to face, into this standoff. These perspectives – journalistic and academic, each of which insisted unhesitatingly upon its own ethical positions and methods -- were developed through years of exposure to individuals within and perspectives unique to our history and experience. And as a result, could it then be that both of us were acting as representatives of the mass population of our field? That we as individuals were each in a sense channeling those many others? In the scenario of the traditional companies Tapscott & William write about, who are all faced with the prospect of networked-age disruption, we were each treating the other like the unwashed masses of a wiki-type culture. Both of us felt as though we were facing an overwhelming threat, a flood of outside perspectives that threatened to overwhelm the principles – “our” principles -- that we brought to the table. Like those companies, we had to adjust our perspectives in order to accommodate and incorporate the perspectives of those masses without losing sight of what we wanted to create. We had to find a means to recognize the other in ourselves.

Once our tempers had cooled, we began the difficult task of rebuilding. The intensity and intractability of our conflict impressed upon us the knowledge that negotiating our intersecting and only scantly overlapping perspectives required us to take the time to collaborate more thoughtfully and efficiently. Our infrequent meetings weren’t long enough to cover the amount of ground necessary for us to come to an agreeable compromise. Eventually, we settled upon using an unformatted, collaborative document in Google Drive in order to facilitate informal communication without coordinating our widely disparate schedules. This new method of contact also had the benefit of reinforcing a non-proprietary and non-hierarchal dynamic between us as collaborators; as co-owners of the document, we held equal power over its organization and development. At first, its format was rigid and categorical, consisting of subject headings such as “Schedule” and “Readings”, each of which contained a number of quick, bullet-pointed notes. As the document evolved, however, those categories disappeared into a simulacrum of casual conversation. Over the course of several days, the headings and the subjects they summarized were either modified into near-unrecognizability or removed entirely, and the entire document became a brainstorm of openly-shared ideas interspersed with friendly banter. This drastically changed the tone of the conversation; it became less confrontational in its tone and more friendly in its disagreement. Eventually, it began to resemble the way in which we’d collaborated on our past excursions into genre fiction. In that endeavor, neither of us felt the need to proprietarily guard our own ideas and ideology; instead, we incorporated them almost without active discussion, using our knowledge of each other’s personality and strengths to coordinate and compromise without the need for active discussion.

It was that revelation—that the methods that worked for us were the same methods we used when creating genre fiction—that inspired our ultimate solution. Our levels of life experience and our field-based perspectives differed too greatly for us to collaborate in a way that focused on either a journalistic or a strictly academic perspective; our experience with literature and creative writing, however, was not nearly so divided. It was a subject that we both enjoyed, that we both had at least tangential experience with, and that we were approximately equally invested in. Moreover, it was a realm in which our profession-inspired ideological intractability could be challenged without threatening the core of our professional identity. Our collective identity as genre fiction writers and fans was far less wedded to any particular perspective than our individual identities as a journalist and a scholar. We therefore decided to center our course around the creation and analysis of hacker-focused pieces of genre fiction. Placing the course within the context of fiction-writing allowed me to be more open to including some of the history that my collaborator suggested be part of the course’s initial material. More significantly, my collaborator was much more amenable to using fiction—rather than journalism—as a form of representation, allowing me to incorporate the themes from my initial proposal without excessive dilution. This allowed us to settle on a dominant perspective for the course that largely eschewed the dominant Western male-dominated hacker narrative while still acknowledging its presence and influence. The fiction-enabled flexibility in Sean’s ideological preferences, allowed me to preserve most of the focus on alternative hacking narratives. Even more fortuitously, he was especially excited by the idea of being able to help lead a workshop and work with writers in creating a finished product. I was able to effectively situate the course within an academic context wherein my pedagogical and critical goals could be addressed and treated as the primary guiding force while still utilizing the practical writing and background knowledge possessed by my journalistic collaborator. In fiction, we were better able to see each other’s truth.

The change in topic from journalism to fiction necessitated a change in the course design. We changed the course from a semester-length course to an eight-week workshop. Additional focus was placed upon giving students the ability to collaborate with each other in order to read and review each other’s work. Our readings were split between history, counter-narratives, and examples of genre fiction. Both the project guidelines and the course readings and schedule can be seen here. **(Insert link to the abbreviated syllabus on the word here; I’m not sure how HP would want this marked up)** We were able to develop a syllabus for the course that satisfied both of our philosophical perspectives. This example provides a practical solution for these kinds of difficult collaborations; by finding a topic that is only *partially* within our own narrow fields of expertise, we were able to create a cohesive whole.

The solution that we came up with ended up mirroring many of the solutions produced by the companies that Tapscott & Williams mentioned. Those companies focused on innovation, on creating something new and different using the “uniquely qualified minds” at their disposal. In the examples that Tapscott & Williams gave, these qualifications weren’t just technical expertise or coding know-how; they were instead a more holistic accounting of individuals’ abilities, wherein those traits that lay outside of the narrow spectrum of technical know-how were nearly as important as the nuts and bolts of technical creation. It was through such a holistic approach—though incorporating elements once outside organizational boundaries—that my collaborator and I were able to come to a compromise and solution. Instead of looking within our professional fields for subjects that were narrowly focused on our own professional training, we looked instead at the qualifications that we possessed outside of that field. Once we did that, we were able to find commonalities that allowed us to develop a new perspective. Both of us were interested in and had produced genre fiction, but neither of us had done this professionally. What creative writing experience we did have was amateur and academic, not practical or professional. Moreover, what formal training we did possess prepared us for, in his case, journalistic creative non-fiction, or, in my case, literary fiction with no fantastical elements. By focusing on this topic on which neither of us had formal expertise, we were able to level the playing field, and thus our interactive paradigm shifted. Instead of us interacting we were each an established company at odds with the masses, we were able to both become the masses, both in each other’s eyes and, more critically, in our own estimation of ourselves. As a result, our product became much more collaborative in its nature, and we were able to work much more cohesively. The dulling of what we had defined for ourselves as our “obvious stakes” and the redirecting of what had been establishing in our minds as power dynamics opened enough create an egalitarian space for creation and collaboration. In other words, our course—and our orientations around it—became less proprietary and more like a commons. Open to peer-review and spontaneous design. More, you might say, like open-source.

As our methods of our collaboration became more commons-oriented in their design, we found our course content also became less structured and more informal. For instance, the course format itself evolved considerably. We originally began with a semester-long course, shortened it to a three month course, and then finally adjusted it to a two month workshop appropriate for bother undergraduate students and advanced high school students. Additionally, while my first attempt at a syllabus had focused entirely upon readings and research, the emphasis of the course as it evolved became largely centered around the production of a deliverable. This decision put much of the control of the course’s ultimate flavor into the hands of the students rather than solely with us the instructors. After all, while we could certainly tell the students what to read—though our syllabus preserved some choice even in that—we cannot tell them what to create, particularly when the focus is on a fiction-based product. Ultimately, just as my collaborator and I relinquished our own complete control to each other, so too did we cede an amount of control to our students. This also mirrors the open-source perspective outlined in Tapscott and Williams’ text. Instead of focusing on “requirements and design specifications,” we focused instead on the creation of a complete and cohesive final product. As a result, the class became less theoretical and more practical in its final implementation; the focus was on making rather than knowledge absorption.

We gradually found ourselves working together and designing our course activities in a way that mirrored the subculture that our course was meant to highlight. Collaboration in fiction and collaboration in software creation are not entirely dissimilar, we found ourselves coming to realize—and the process of creation, we considered, could ideally allow the students insight into the subculture that they are examining—a subculture highlighted in readings like Patrick Jagoda’s “Gaming the Humanities: Digital Humanities, New Media, and Practice-Based Research.” In there, the practice of design and collaboration as, respectively, research and method, are discussed. I was reminded of how Jagoda explores the ways in which collaboration in gameplay and in the practice of game design can help translate difficult concepts to users and to facilitate collaborations between individuals in the sciences and in the humanities. The latter facilitation was apparent in the process of designing the course itself. By shifting the focus away from the specific and into the realm of creating something that we found interesting but not hyper-obvious as named stakes in profession, we were able to facilitate the creation of our syllabus in a way that satisfied both of our goals. Just as games are typically read as being situated somewhat outside the purview of traditional science or humanities research, fiction-writing workshops are situated somewhat outside the purview of both journalists and budding social science researchers. Jagoda’s insights into the non-utopian nature of collaboration also rang true. The disparate backgrounds that allowed us to bring different strengths to the table might have caused us to be forever stuck in a near-gridlock conflict. By focusing on the creation of a novel product, we were able to overcome that gridlock.

I kept Jagoda’s insight into gaming as a tool for research and social justice in mind when it came time to design the collaborative portion of our workshops. Instead of forcing students to submit their drafts to the instructor for review and criticism, we placed an emphasis on them working with each other in order to develop their drafts and concepts. While guidance would be provided in the form of suggested readings and lectures, the ultimate design of the product was entirely up to the students. We did this in part to de-emphasize some of the courses academic leanings—thus, as stated in the previous paragraph, helping us to create a product that had sufficient novelty and distance from our preferred fields of expertise—but also to instill in the students the ability to use their design as a form of research. Just as games may use their mechanics in order to communicate concepts, so too did we use the hyper-collaborative structure of our workshops in order to emphasize the collaborative and making aspects of hacker subcultures. In particular, by giving students agency over their own creations, we allowed them to experience some of the aspects of self-determination that is often seen in the traditional hacker subcultures. However, by also giving them some agency over *each other*’s creations, we evoked some of the themes of social responsibility and representation present in my original course design. This is particularly true for those instances in which we gave students instructions to evaluate each other’s work in the context of specific course lectures. By engaging them in the practice of criticism, we encourage them to both integrate the concepts that we are teaching and to utilize those concepts when they either create or consume genre fiction. While this is not gamification in the strictest sense, it does evoke some of the aspects that Jagoda finds most useful in the pedagogical application of gaming. By having them make and do instead of merely listen and learn, we are reinforcing the concepts that we wish to impart upon students, making the course more efficient and engaging.

At this point, after days and even weeks of collaboration and compromise, I was utterly exhausted and almost completely relieved. Less than a month prior, I had been despairing not only over the future of our syllabus, but over the future of our friendship. And though both of those things were now in fine enough shape, the process of getting there had meant more than a few sleepless nights spent pouring over readings or waiting anxiously for feedback. However, despite all of this, we were now in possession of a syllabus with which we were both largely satisfied. Unfortunately, this satisfaction was not without qualification. While we had created a course with a defined audience and a robust pedagogical stance, we were now unsure as to where, exactly, this course could be implemented. Both of us felt that simply having the idea for a course, or even having a syllabus for a course, wasn’t enough; we needed to find a purpose for the course beyond itself, and to find a potential forum suitable for what our course had become.

It was here that those nights spent reading really bore fruit, as I found a solution to my problem within another course reading. Elizabeth Clark’s “The Digital Imperative: Making the Case for a 21^st^ Century Pedagogy” deals directly with the subject of writing education and its place in a collaborative classroom environment. However, instead of taking a traditional workshop approach, she incorporates the idea of writing into a new digital environment, one in which the writing produced by students is not only meant for the classroom, but also for a larger digital environment. Translating that to our syllabus as it presently stood, I realized that the importance of the course lay not only in educating students and urging them to create, but in facilitating the sharing of and conversation around the works that they produced. It wasn’t enough for us to urge our students to write; we had to give them a way to display their work within the larger community, particularly since the works that they would be studying and creating were largely intended for a broad, popular audience. Integration with traditional academic structures such as a high school or university wasn’t enough; we needed our students to be able to engage with a broader swath of society in order to the course material justice.

Figuring how to how to stimulate this engagement was complicated by our course’s now-shortened timeframe. We had decided on an intensive eight-week course rather than a semester-long course, and we knew that we would need every bit of those eight weeks to workshop our students’ writing. Moreover, we wanted the themes present within the students’ finished work to be the major focus of our time in class. Due to this, we elected to forgo direct integration into the new digital paradigm; focusing on introducing students to the online dissemination of their work and preparing them to fully navigate the waters surrounding digital personas and online publishing would require an entirely different kind of course. However, we still encouraged our students to prepare their work for a public forum. Rather than an in-class reading or performance of their work, we decided to have them prepare to present in a public library, and to couch the course itself as a catalyst for sparking a broader discussion. While this certainly isn’t the same sort of online agora as a well-circulated blog, it does open up both the students and the course to engagement with a larger community. That community is admittedly local in its scope, but is likely to be less homogenous in its background and ideals than the class itself. It presents both the course and the works created within as subjects for comment and critique from individuals who are uninvolved with the process of creation; the discussion period after their presentation and performances further emphasizes this theme of discourse within the public eye.

By choosing to focus upon fiction in the context of representation, we opened students up to using storytelling as a method of social engagement. While the stories that we asked students to create are fictional, the themes that we ask them to address are very real. In creating fictional works, we encourage them to develop the rhetorical and storytelling skills necessary to engage audiences in this sort of digital storytelling. These skills could easily translate to the kind of engaging non-fiction necessary to draw others in to their own lived experiences. Alternately, these skills could encourage students to create works of fiction that promote and inform discussions of representational and social justice themes. The frequent workshopping in our course also promotes the kind of quick iteration necessary when creating content for public consumption, particularly when engaged in an expressive written format such as blogging or video creation. All of these goals fit with Clark’s portrayal of storytelling as an increasingly relevant method of discourse in a digital age. A follow-up to this course could more fully expand on these themes, using the groundwork in our workshop in order to create more broadly disseminated student work.

Ultimately, the adoption of a novel form of pedagogy allowed Sean and I to both create a workable syllabus and prevent the fracture of our long-standing friendship. Our syllabus, as it stands, is completely workable, and we hope to one day have the opportunity to utilize it in a community setting. However, to this date, our busy schedules and geographic distance have made this impossible. The lessons that we learned, however, have still been utilized. After creating our collaborative syllabus, I taught an undergraduate course in new media, culture, and society. I was able to adapt several of the workshop activities into class activities. These activities were facilitated by a classroom that allowed for on-the-spot student collaboration and digital presentations. In this way, I was able to adapt the methods that Sean and I had utilized from Jagoda and Clark to serve as a foundation for the teaching of a related topic. Our work informed the entire way in which I approach instruction and course design, and gave me novel ideas for engaging an increasingly digitally informed and dependent student body. This a tangible result that exists outside of our deliverable product, and speaks to the value that collaboration has as a method for spurring individual intellectual and professional growth and development.

Ultimately, it was our willingness to step outside of our preferred fields that allowed us to avoid disaster and create a coherent and productive syllabus. Our method of collaboration ended up informing the structure of the course in a way that both reflected the source material and addressed our topic in a way that would allow for students to continue to engage with the subject and with their work long after the end of the workshop. This sort of open-source creation and pedagogy can be applied to future course collaborations with individuals who lie entirely outside of academia. Instead of forcing these individuals to engage directly within a traditional academic environment, we can create a new space in which individuals are free to engage in collaboration and making-type activities. The creation of this space is also likely to lead to an environment in which students are encourage to learn through the same sort of creation and collaboration in which their instructor is engaged. In this sense, a clash of disparate priorities has the potential to result in a novel form of pedagogy in which compromise is both necessary and desirable instead of reluctant and ineffective.
