---
layout: post
title:  "Introduction"
author: Anita Say Chan
---

“Humanities knowledge used to have a recognizable form. We knew it when we saw it because it had looked the same for centuries: Printed pages with linear prose and a bibliographic apparatus written by an author and published in the form of an article or book. Though the format could vary widely… \[w\]ith few exceptions, the humanities have adopted homogeneous approaches to producing scholarly research.” (Burdick, Drucker, Lunefeld, Presner, Schnapp 2014, 29) So wrote the authors of the 2014 text, Digital\_Humanities, Anne Burdick, Johanna Drucker, Peter Lunefeld, Todd Presner and Jeffrey Schnapp. Such a timely observation about the growing distance between still dominant practices of knowledge making and sharing in the humanities that continue to privilege “authoring, narrative, and textual models specific to the medium of print” (7) – and rapidly diversifying possibilities of media expression was part of what had drawn my attention to the digital humanities to begin with.

DH, after all, has been among the leading academic fields to explore how new forms of digital media – that today extend significantly more varied, distributable, and multiplicative forms of communication beyond linear text – might offer new opportunities for scholarly research and communication. Particularly for young scholars like myself, whose own graduate training just a decade ago had been based almost entirely in written work, such means of addressing the contemporary temporal disjunctures in humanities fields seemed much needed. Even at institutions like MIT — a site proud of its own tradition in embracing innovation, making and production as key academic skills — where I had completed my graduate studies, final course assignments consisted *almost entirely* of papers, typically 25 pages or so in length, that were themselves meant to rehearse chapter-size installments for a developing monograph. That my research project was situated at the intersection of global digital studies, science and technology studies, and new media studies, only made the temporal and rhetorical disconnect seem that much more poignant.

Today, there’s little question that the investments within the field of DH to advance new models for academic argumentation and pedagogy have rapidly yielded a growing and increasingly sophisticated array of digital resources for scholars. Media-rich platforms, information-based tools and visual resources that span a range of publishing, archiving and content analysis capabilities have now multiplied. This, alongside new centers and institutions at universities charged with stewarding such tools and their application across and beyond individual campuses. As importantly, DH methods and principles have enriched conversations about the indispensable need to foster more diverse professional literacies and academic skills in “reading” and “writing” across varied mediated and rhetorical forms, and the importance of including colleagues — both junior and senior scholars alike – in such key work.

But for as energetic and rapid as developments in DH have been in some institutional sites, access to such crucial and prescient conversations, research tools, and pedagogical resources has arguably unraveled across academic institutions in a highly uneven form. Universities with institutionalized DH centers and resources in particular have lead – and continue to lead — conversations in DH around the future of humanistic knowledge exchange. They do so on an increasing basis with considerably-sized financial resources – selectively and competitively awarded from national funding institutions — to simultaneously develop new digital tools and technologies that mean to represent the vanguard of research and pedagogy for diverse disciplines across the humanities. Such tools, as our authors of the Digital\_Humanities volume write – as scholars within leading US universities afforded with DH centers themselves – can make returns on such investments by demonstrating the potential of the “humanities as a generative enterprise: one in which students and faculty alike are making things as they study and perform research, generating not just texts (in the form of analysis, commentary, narration, critique) but also images, interactions, cross-media corpora, software, and platforms.” Burdick, Drucker, Lunefeld, Presner, Schnapp 2014, 7)

Such a forecast can sound indeed like a promising future for humanities disciplines (particularly against the prospect of shrinking investments to support the growth of humanities). But in the wake of such energetic projections, many campuses (indeed *most* campuses, even in just the US alone) continue to lack resources to support the work required to transform humanities landscapes and the researchers working within them into “generative enterprises.” Even if unintentional, the uneven access to such resources – as well as the unequal investments that tool *development* has enthusiastically received compared to the relatively modest funds that get dedicated to ensuring inclusive models of their deployment– can arguably produce what may often look like a new form of exclusionary elitism within DH. And reasonably, many of our colleagues may be left pondering not only the implications of hailing digital tool production and the forms of complex making with them as the future of the humanities (when it’s clear that most faculty lack the resources needed to be included in what would count as “sophisticated making” under such prospects) – but asking themselves if that then leaves most campuses and faculty outside the possibility of *even beginning* to participate in digital humanities developments at all?

This volume represents a commitment that we – allies and scholars of DH who are dedicated to seeing its continued growth among our colleagues working through diverse local contexts – issue a resounding “no” to that question. Not only because we must push for a future of DH inclusive of broad forms of scholars and scholarship – but because there remain *many* ways still to highlight the diversely rich and often under-appreciated forms of *sophisticated making* that are familiar practices within humanities disciplines, where new modes of innovation could be pushed from. These may not have necessarily depended on digital tools for production, and particularly when they involve deeply routine forms of academic practice, neither do they necessarily receive their due attention as models of complex making. But they invite us to ask nonetheless how DH communities and knowledge making might be extended were such *familiar* forms and making models adopted *too* as sites from which new DH experiments and engagements could expand?

This volume frames the **course syllabus** as just one such sites. As a knowledge object –necessarily produced for pedagogy by scholars junior and senior alike - a syllabus, I’ve been keen to remind my own students, is *always* a function of design. (This is something that the Oxford English Dictionary’s etymology for the word, citing its derivation from the modern Latin word syllabus’ meaning as a "list", points to) In modern university contexts, syllabi design now involve planning for a long, extended, and patient conversation – unraveled over the course of 8 to 16 weeks – with built in pauses (built in to allow ideas to get to simmer, develop, and sometimes take other kinds of material form) until the next time (ie. class) that conversation and dialogue gets to reconvene. In the process, syllabi designers ask that a class’ participants draw themselves into “dialogue” with other actors: with other students and instructors in a class setting most directly, but also with the authors of texts that have been deliberately drawn in as readings, as well as with the authors those authors draw upon, and so on. In this rather extensible sense, syllabi are not just objects, but function indeed as boundary objects in the vein that Science and Technology Studies scholars Susan Leigh Starr and James Griesemer famously wrote of, that can draw in diverse actors of multiple affiliations around a common project of shared interest and flexible, inclusive framing.

The essays in this volume, all written by graduate students enrolled in a new, inter-disciplinary graduate seminar I taught exploring Collaboration Systems at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign’s Institute of Communications Research in the Fall of 2014 –offer reflections that directly address the dynamically discursive nature of syllabi as boundary objects. They explore the complex, often surprisingly fraught negotiations that are involved with traditional designing syllabi, and that can be made especially apparent when one new element is introduced: the charge to bring in a collaborator from outside each student’s self-identified home disciplines, and to enroll that partner in a process of collaborative syllabi design for an inter-disciplinary course of their own definition. While the students enrolled for the course represented an inter-disciplinary mix themselves as largely-second year PhD students from Media Studies, Communications, Anthropology, Library Sciences, and Art History departments, none had ever been asked to complete such an assignment before. In conversations during early sessions, it became immediately clear how such an assignment was unlike any other they had been asked to complete for the final project work for other courses students had been enrolled in, which indeed, had given almost exclusive focus to written papers as the chosen format through which to develop academic mastery. While their classes continued to provide ample time and space to enable them to rehearse their voices as future researchers and theoretical contributors (by practicing the production of literature reviews and scholarly citations as bases for scholarly analysis, for instance), much less time and space had been dedicated to fostering opportunities to invest creative energies in developing their voices as future pedagogical practitioners.

Requesting a co-designed syllabus as a key deliverable of students’ final project work attempts to bring some balance to such current modes of PhD training, and to open spaces to prepare students for a shifting job market that today, almost always demand more of them than just a keen knack for manuscript preparation. Skills not only in innovative pedagogy, but collaboration and team work in traditional forms of knowledge exchange as well as making practices, are increasingly valued capacities. My own [*syllabus*](https://seeingcollaborations.wordpress.com/readingsschedule/) for the class thus included readings that would explore the politics of collaboration, as read from diverse fields — from feminist and post-colonial studies to science and technology studies and digital humanities – that had signaled themselves as invested in collaborative practices and spaces as a means of extending scholarly publics. Everyone in other words, from Donna Haraway and Tara McPherson to Paolo Freire, Lucy Suchman, and James Scott, I knew, would be included in the syllabus. And indeed, given my own mixed background as an anthropologist working within fields like Latin American and science and technology studies, such hybridized encounters was something I knew students would also likely expect from me as an instructor.

So the challenge I posed here to my classroom of students was to Collaborate: To define just one object of shared pedagogical interest, and draw in an “OTHER” to co-design a syllabus that didn’t represent just one discipline — but multiple. As Tara Mcpheron reminded us in her widely cited 2012 essay, “Why are the digital humanities so white?”, we know this is *much* harder than it sounds. To move beyond the “patterned isolationism” and “modular politics” that she writes have become too common within the academy today, requires dedicated, patient collaborative work. As well as potentially the development of new relational practices.

The following students essays in this volume represent reflections on experimental attempts to “develop such \[new\] common languages” between distinct fields. These all look very different. And we’ll see that these can yield experiences that are alternately frustrating and fruitful. But in their honesty and openness, as well as their novelty, we hope they are ones too that can be illuminating — and that might open some new “common spaces” (if not yet a “common language”) for our conversations on collaboration.  

– [@wrongrrl](https://twitter.com/wrongrrl)